In a narrow high-arched Gothic room,
FAUST sitting uneasy at his desk.

Faust.
Have now, alas! quite studied through
Philosophy and Medicine,
And Law, and ah! Theology, too,
With hot desire the truth to win!
And here, at last, I stand, poor fool!
As wise as when I entered school;
Am called Magister, Doctor, indeed,--
Ten livelong years cease not to lead
Backward and forward, to and fro,
My scholars by the nose--and lo!
Just nothing, I see, is the sum of our learning,
To the very core of my heart 'tis burning.
'Tis true I'm more clever than all the foplings,
Doctors, Magisters, Authors, and Popelings;
Am plagued by no scruple, nor doubt, nor cavil,
Nor lingering fear of hell or devil--
What then? all pleasure is fled forever;
To know one thing I vainly endeavor,
There's nothing wherein one fellow-creature
Could be mended or bettered with me for a teacher.
And then, too, nor goods nor gold have I,
Nor fame nor worldly dignity,--
A condition no dog could longer live in!
And so to magic my soul I've given,
If, haply, by spirits' mouth and might,
Some mysteries may not be brought to light;
That to teach, no longer may be my lot,
With bitter sweat, what I need to be taught;
That I may know what the world contains
In its innermost heart and finer veins,
See all its energies and seeds
And deal no more in words but in deeds.
O full, round Moon, didst thou but thine
For the last time on this woe of mine!
Thou whom so many a midnight I
Have watched, at this desk, come up the sky:
O'er books and papers, a dreary pile,
Then, mournful friend! uprose thy smile!
Oh that I might on the mountain-height,
Walk in the noon of thy blessed light,
Round mountain-caverns with spirits hover,
Float in thy gleamings the meadows over,
And freed from the fumes of a lore-crammed brain,
Bathe in thy dew and be well again!
Woe! and these walls still prison me?
Dull, dismal hole! my curse on thee!
Where heaven's own light, with its blessed beams,
Through painted panes all sickly gleams!
Hemmed in by these old book-piles tall,
Which, gnawed by worms and deep in must,
Rise to the roof against a wall
Of smoke-stained paper, thick with dust;
'Mid glasses, boxes, where eye can see,
Filled with old, obsolete instruments,
Stuffed with old heirlooms of implements--
That is thy world! There's a world for thee!
And still dost ask what stifles so
The fluttering heart within thy breast?
By what inexplicable woe
The springs of life are all oppressed?
Instead of living nature, where
God made and planted men, his sons,
Through smoke and mould, around thee stare
Grim skeletons and dead men's bones.
Up! Fly! Far out into the land!
And this mysterious volume, see!
By Nostradamus's own hand,
Is it not guide enough for thee?
Then shalt thou thread the starry skies,
And, taught by nature in her walks,
The spirit's might shall o'er thee rise,
As ghost to ghost familiar talks.
Vain hope that mere dry sense should here
Explain the holy signs to thee.
I feel you, spirits, hovering near;
Oh, if you hear me, answer me!
[He opens the book and beholds the sign of the Macrocosm.]
Ha! as I gaze, what ecstasy is this,
In one full tide through all my senses flowing!
I feel a new-born life, a holy bliss
Through nerves and veins mysteriously glowing.
Was it a God who wrote each sign?
Which, all my inner tumult stilling,
And this poor heart with rapture filling,
Reveals to me, by force divine,
Great Nature's energies around and through me thrilling?
Am I a God? It grows so bright to me!
Each character on which my eye reposes
Nature in act before my soul discloses.
The sage's word was truth, at last I see:
"The spirit-world, unbarred, is waiting;
Thy sense is locked, thy heart is dead!
Up, scholar, bathe, unhesitating,
The earthly breast in morning-red!"
[He contemplates the sign.]
How all one whole harmonious weaves,
Each in the other works and lives!
See heavenly powers ascending and descending,
The golden buckets, one long line, extending!
See them with bliss-exhaling pinions winging
Their way from heaven through earth--their singing
Harmonious through the universe is ringing!
Majestic show! but ah! a show alone!
Nature! where find I thee, immense, unknown?
Where you, ye breasts? Ye founts all life sustaining,
On which hang heaven and earth, and where
Men's withered hearts their waste repair--
Ye gush, ye nurse, and I must sit complaining?
[He opens reluctantly the book and sees the sign of the earth-spirit.]
How differently works on me this sign!
Thou, spirit of the earth, art to me nearer;
I feel my powers already higher, clearer,
I glow already as with new-pressed wine,
I feel the mood to brave life's ceaseless clashing,
To bear its frowning woes, its raptures flashing,
To mingle in the tempest's dashing,
And not to tremble in the shipwreck's crashing;
Clouds gather o'er my head--
Them moon conceals her light--
The lamp goes out!
It smokes!--Red rays are darting, quivering
Around my head--comes down
A horror from the vaulted roof
And seizes me!
Spirit that I invoked, thou near me art,
Unveil thyself!
Ha! what a tearing in my heart!
Upheaved like an ocean
My senses toss with strange emotion!
I feel my heart to thee entirely given!
Thou must! and though the price were life--were heaven!
[He seizes the book and pronounces mysteriously the sign of the spirit.
A ruddy flame darts out, the spirit appears in the flame.]

Spirit.
Who calls upon me?

Faust. [Turning away.]
Horrid sight!

Spirit.
Long have I felt the mighty action,
Upon my sphere, of thy attraction,
And now--

Faust.
Away, intolerable sprite!

Spirit.
Thou breath'st a panting supplication
To hear my voice, my face to see;
Thy mighty prayer prevails on me,
I come!--what miserable agitation
Seizes this demigod! Where is the cry of thought?
Where is the breast? that in itself a world begot,
And bore and cherished, that with joy did tremble
And fondly dream us spirits to resemble.
Where art thou, Faust? whose voice rang through my ear,
Whose mighty yearning drew me from my sphere?
Is this thing thou? that, blasted by my breath,
Through all life's windings shuddereth,
A shrinking, cringing, writhing worm!

Faust.
Thee, flame-born creature, shall I fear?
'Tis I, 'tis Faust, behold thy peer!

Spirit.
In life's tide currents, in action's storm,
Up and down, like a wave,
Like the wind I sweep!
Cradle and grave--
A limitless deep---
An endless weaving
To and fro,
A restless heaving
Of life and glow,--
So shape I, on Destiny's thundering loom,
The Godhead's live garment, eternal in bloom.

Faust.
Spirit that sweep'st the world from end to end,
How near, this hour, I feel myself to thee!

Spirit.
Thou'rt like the spirit thou canst comprehend,
Not me! [Vanishes.]

Faust.
[Collapsing.] Not thee?
Whom then?
I, image of the Godhead,
And no peer for thee!
[A knocking.]
O Death! I know it!--'tis my Famulus--
Good-bye, ye dreams of bliss Elysian!
Shame! that so many a glowing vision
This dried-up sneak must scatter thus!

[WAGNER, in sleeping-gown and night-cap, a lamp in his hand.
FAUST turns round with an annoyed look.]

Wagner.
Excuse me! you're engaged in declamation;
'Twas a Greek tragedy no doubt you read?
I in this art should like initiation,
For nowadays it stands one well instead.
I've often heard them boast, a preacher
Might profit with a player for his teacher.

Faust.
Yes, when the preacher is a player, granted:
As often happens in our modern ways.

Wagner.
Ah! when one with such love of study's haunted,
And scarcely sees the world on holidays,
And takes a spy-glass, as it were, to read it,
How can one by persuasion hope to lead it?

Faust.
What you don't feel, you'll never catch by hunting,
It must gush out spontaneous from the soul,
And with a fresh delight enchanting
The hearts of all that hear control.
Sit there forever! Thaw your glue-pot,--
Blow up your ash-heap to a flame, and brew,
With a dull fire, in your stew-pot,
Of other men's leavings a ragout!
Children and apes will gaze delighted,
If their critiques can pleasure impart;
But never a heart will be ignited,
Comes not the spark from the speaker's heart.

Wagner.
Delivery makes the orator's success;
There I'm still far behindhand, I confess.

Faust.
Seek honest gains, without pretence!
Be not a cymbal-tinkling fool!
Sound understanding and good sense
Speak out with little art or rule;
And when you've something earnest to utter,
Why hunt for words in such a flutter?
Yes, your discourses, that are so refined'
In which humanity's poor shreds you frizzle,
Are unrefreshing as the mist and wind
That through the withered leaves of autumn whistle!

Wagner.
Ah God! well, art is long!
And life is short and fleeting.
What headaches have I felt and what heart-beating,
When critical desire was strong.
How hard it is the ways and means to master
By which one gains each fountain-head!
And ere one yet has half the journey sped,
The poor fool dies--O sad disaster!

Faust.
Is parchment, then, the holy well-spring, thinkest,
A draught from which thy thirst forever slakes?
No quickening element thou drinkest,
Till up from thine own soul the fountain breaks.

Wagner.
Excuse me! in these olden pages
We catch the spirit of the by-gone ages,
We see what wisest men before our day have thought,
And to what glorious heights we their bequests have brought.

Faust.
O yes, we've reached the stars at last!
My friend, it is to us,--the buried past,--
A book with seven seals protected;
Your spirit of the times is, then,
At bottom, your own spirit, gentlemen,
In which the times are seen reflected.
And often such a mess that none can bear it;
At the first sight of it they run away.
A dust-bin and a lumber-garret,
At most a mock-heroic play
With fine, pragmatic maxims teeming,
The mouths of puppets well-beseeming!

Wagner.
But then the world! the heart and mind of man!
To know of these who would not pay attention?

Faust.
To know them, yes, as weaklings can!
Who dares the child's true name outright to mention?
The few who any thing thereof have learned,
Who out of their heart's fulness needs must gabble,
And show their thoughts and feelings to the rabble,
Have evermore been crucified and burned.
I pray you, friend, 'tis wearing into night,
Let us adjourn here, for the present.

Wagner.
I had been glad to stay till morning light,
This learned talk with you has been so pleasant,
But the first day of Easter comes to-morrow.
And then an hour or two I'll borrow.
With zeal have I applied myself to learning,
True, I know much, yet to know all am burning.
[Exit.]

Faust.
[Alone.] See how in his head only, hope still lingers,
Who evermore to empty rubbish clings,
With greedy hand grubs after precious things,
And leaps for joy when some poor worm he fingers!
That such a human voice should dare intrude,
Where all was full of ghostly tones and features!
Yet ah! this once, my gratitude
Is due to thee, most wretched of earth's creatures.
Thou snatchedst me from the despairing state
In which my senses, well nigh crazed, were sunken.
The apparition was so giant-great,
That to a very dwarf my soul had shrunken.
I, godlike, who in fancy saw but now
Eternal truth's fair glass in wondrous nearness,
Rejoiced in heavenly radiance and clearness,
Leaving the earthly man below;
I, more than cherub, whose free force
Dreamed, through the veins of nature penetrating,
To taste the life of Gods, like them creating,
Behold me this presumption expiating!
A word of thunder sweeps me from my course.
Myself with thee no longer dare I measure;
Had I the power to draw thee down at pleasure;
To hold thee here I still had not the force.
Oh, in that blest, ecstatic hour,
I felt myself so small, so great;
Thou drovest me with cruel power
Back upon man's uncertain fate
What shall I do? what slum, thus lonely?
That impulse must I, then, obey?
Alas! our very deeds, and not our sufferings only,
How do they hem and choke life's way!
To all the mind conceives of great and glorious
A strange and baser mixture still adheres;
Striving for earthly good are we victorious?
A dream and cheat the better part appears.
The feelings that could once such noble life inspire
Are quenched and trampled out in passion's mire.
Where Fantasy, erewhile, with daring flight
Out to the infinite her wings expanded,
A little space can now suffice her quite,
When hope on hope time's gulf has wrecked and stranded.
Care builds her nest far down the heart's recesses,
There broods o'er dark, untold distresses,
Restless she sits, and scares thy joy and peace away;
She puts on some new mask with each new day,
Herself as house and home, as wife and child presenting,
As fire and water, bane and blade;
What never hits makes thee afraid,
And what is never lost she keeps thee still lamenting.
Not like the Gods am I! Too deep that truth is thrust!
But like the worm, that wriggles through the dust;
Who, as along the dust for food he feels,
Is crushed and buried by the traveller's heels.
Is it not dust that makes this lofty wall
Groan with its hundred shelves and cases;
The rubbish and the thousand trifles all
That crowd these dark, moth-peopled places?
Here shall my craving heart find rest?
Must I perchance a thousand books turn over,
To find that men are everywhere distrest,
And here and there one happy one discover?
Why grin'st thou down upon me, hollow skull?
But that thy brain, like mine, once trembling, hoping,
Sought the light day, yet ever sorrowful,
Burned for the truth in vain, in twilight groping?
Ye, instruments, of course, are mocking me;
Its wheels, cogs, bands, and barrels each one praises.
I waited at the door; you were the key;
Your ward is nicely turned, and yet no bolt it raises.
Unlifted in the broadest day,
Doth Nature's veil from prying eyes defend her,
And what (he chooses not before thee to display,
Not all thy screws and levers can force her to surrender.
Old trumpery! not that I e'er used thee, but
Because my father used thee, hang'st thou o'er me,
Old scroll! thou hast been stained with smoke and smut
Since, on this desk, the lamp first dimly gleamed before me.
Better have squandered, far, I now can clearly see,
My little all, than melt beneath it, in this Tophet!
That which thy fathers have bequeathed to thee,
Earn and become possessor of it!
What profits not a weary load will be;
What it brings forth alone can yield the moment profit.
Why do I gaze as if a spell had bound me
Up yonder? Is that flask a magnet to the eyes?
What lovely light, so sudden, blooms around me?
As when in nightly woods we hail the full-moon-rise.
I greet thee, rarest phial, precious potion!
As now I take thee down with deep devotion,
In thee I venerate man's wit and art.
Quintessence of all soporific flowers,
Extract of all the finest deadly powers,
Thy favor to thy master now impart!
I look on thee, the sight my pain appeases,
I handle thee, the strife of longing ceases,
The flood-tide of the spirit ebbs away.
Far out to sea I'm drawn, sweet voices listening,
The glassy waters at my feet are glistening,
To new shores beckons me a new-born day.
A fiery chariot floats, on airy pinions,
To where I sit! Willing, it beareth me,
On a new path, through ether's blue dominions,
To untried spheres of pure activity.
This lofty life, this bliss elysian,
Worm that thou waft erewhile, deservest thou?
Ay, on this earthly sun, this charming vision,
Turn thy back resolutely now!
Boldly draw near and rend the gates asunder,
By which each cowering mortal gladly steals.
Now is the time to show by deeds of wonder
That manly greatness not to godlike glory yields;
Before that gloomy pit to stand, unfearing,
Where Fantasy self-damned in its own torment lies,
Still onward to that pass-way steering,
Around whose narrow mouth hell-flames forever rise;
Calmly to dare the step, serene, unshrinking,
Though into nothingness the hour should see thee sinking.
Now, then, come down from thy old case, I bid thee,
Where thou, forgotten, many a year hast hid thee,
Into thy master's hand, pure, crystal glass!
The joy-feasts of the fathers thou hast brightened,
The hearts of gravest guests were lightened,
When, pledged, from hand to hand they saw thee pass.
Thy sides, with many a curious type bedight,
Which each, as with one draught he quaffed the liquor
Must read in rhyme from off the wondrous beaker,
Remind me, ah! of many a youthful night.
I shall not hand thee now to any neighbor,
Not now to show my wit upon thy carvings labor;
Here is a juice of quick-intoxicating might.
The rich brown flood adown thy sides is streaming,
With my own choice ingredients teeming;
Be this last draught, as morning now is gleaming,
Drained as a lofty pledge to greet the festal light!
[He puts the goblet to his lips.

Ringing of bells and choral song.

Chorus of Angels.
Christ hath arisen!
Joy to humanity!
No more shall vanity,
Death and inanity
Hold thee in prison!

Faust.
What hum of music, what a radiant tone,
Thrills through me, from my lips the goblet stealing!
Ye murmuring bells, already make ye known
The Easter morn's first hour, with solemn pealing?
Sing you, ye choirs, e'en now, the glad, consoling song,
That once, from angel-lips, through gloom sepulchral rung,
A new immortal covenant sealing?

Chorus of Women.
Spices we carried,
Laid them upon his breast;
Tenderly buried
Him whom we loved the best;

Cleanly to bind him
Took we the fondest care,
Ah! and we find him
Now no more there.

Chorus of Angels.
Christ hath ascended!
Reign in benignity!
Pain and indignity,
Scorn and malignity,
Their work have ended.

Faust.
Why seek ye me in dust, forlorn,
Ye heavenly tones, with soft enchanting?
Go, greet pure-hearted men this holy morn!
Your message well I hear, but faith to me is wanting;
Wonder, its dearest child, of Faith is born.
To yonder spheres I dare no more aspire,
Whence the sweet tidings downward float;
And yet, from childhood heard, the old, familiar note
Calls back e'en now to life my warm desire.
Ah! once how sweetly fell on me the kiss
Of heavenly love in the still Sabbath stealing!
Prophetically rang the bells with solemn pealing;
A prayer was then the ecstasy of bliss;
A blessed and mysterious yearning
Drew me to roam through meadows, woods, and skies;
And, midst a thousand tear-drops burning,
I felt a world within me rise
That strain, oh, how it speaks youth's gleesome plays and feelings,
Joys of spring-festivals long past;
Remembrance holds me now, with childhood's fond appealings,
Back from the fatal step, the last.
Sound on, ye heavenly strains, that bliss restore me!
Tears gush, once more the spell of earth is o'er me

Chorus of Disciples.
Has the grave's lowly one
Risen victorious?
Sits he, God's Holy One,
High-throned and glorious?
He, in this blest new birth,
Rapture creative knows;
Ah! on the breast of earth
Taste we still nature's woes.
Left here to languish
Lone in a world like this,
Fills us with anguish
Master, thy bliss!

Chorus of Angels.
Christ has arisen
Out of corruption's gloom.
Break from your prison,
Burst every tomb!
Livingly owning him,
Lovingly throning him,
Feasting fraternally,
Praying diurnally,
Bearing his messages,
Sharing his promises,
Find ye your master near,
Find ye him here!
Pedestrians of all descriptions stroll forth.

Mechanics' Apprentices.
Where are you going to carouse?

Others.
We're all going out to the Hunter's House.

The First.
We're going, ourselves, out to the Mill-House, brothers.

An Apprentice.
The Fountain-House I rather recommend.

Second.
'Tis not a pleasant road, my friend.

The second group.
What will you do, then?

A Third.
I go with the others.

Fourth.
Come up to Burgdorf, there you're sure to find good cheer,
The handsomest of girls and best of beer,
And rows, too, of the very first water.

Fifth.
You monstrous madcap, does your skin
Itch for the third time to try that inn?
I've had enough for my taste in that quarter.

Servant-girl.
No! I'm going back again to town for one.

Others.
Under those poplars we are sure to meet him.

First Girl.
But that for me is no great fun;
For you are always sure to get him,
He never dances with any but you.
Great good to me your luck will do!

Others.
He's not alone, I heard him say,
The curly-head would be with him to-day.

Scholar.
Stars! how the buxom wenches stride there!
Quick, brother! we must fasten alongside there.
Strong beer, good smart tobacco, and the waist
Of a right handsome gall, well rigg'd, now that's my taste.

Citizen's Daughter.
Do see those fine, young fellows yonder!
'Tis, I declare, a great disgrace;
When they might have the very best, I wonder,
After these galls they needs must race!

Second scholar [to the first].
Stop! not so fast! there come two more behind,
My eyes! but ain't they dressed up neatly?
One is my neighbor, or I'm blind;
I love the girl, she looks so sweetly.
Alone all quietly they go,
You'll find they'll take us, by and bye, in tow.

First.
No, brother! I don't like these starched up ways.
Make haste! before the game slips through our fingers.
The hand that swings the broom o' Saturdays
On Sundays round thy neck most sweetly lingers.

Citizen.
No, I don't like at all this new-made burgomaster!
His insolence grows daily ever faster.
No good from him the town will get!
Will things grow better with him? Never!
We're under more constraint than ever,
And pay more tax than ever yet.

Beggar.
[Sings.] Good gentlemen, and you, fair ladies,
With such red cheeks and handsome dress,
Think what my melancholy trade is,
And see and pity my distress!
Help the poor harper, sisters, brothers!
Who loves to give, alone is gay.
This day, a holiday to others,
Make it for me a harvest day.

Another citizen.

Sundays and holidays, I like, of all things, a good prattle
Of war and fighting, and the whole array,
When back in Turkey, far away,
The peoples give each other battle.
One stands before the window, drinks his glass,
And sees the ships with flags glide slowly down the river;
Comes home at night, when out of sight they pass,
And sings with joy, "Oh, peace forever!"

Third citizen.
So I say, neighbor! let them have their way,
Crack skulls and in their crazy riot
Turn all things upside down they may,
But leave us here in peace and quiet.

Old Woman [to the citizen's daughter].
Heyday, brave prinking this! the fine young blood!
Who is not smitten that has met you?--
But not so proud! All very good!
And what you want I'll promise soon to get you.

Citizen's Daughter.
Come, Agatha! I dread in public sight
To prattle with such hags; don't stay, O, Luddy!
'Tis true she showed me, on St. Andrew's night,
My future sweetheart in the body.

The other.
She showed me mine, too, in a glass,
Right soldierlike, with daring comrades round him.
I look all round, I study all that pass,
But to this hour I have not found him.

Soldiers.
Castles with lowering
Bulwarks and towers,
Maidens with towering
Passions and powers,
Both shall be ours!
Daring the venture,
Glorious the pay!

When the brass trumpet
Summons us loudly,
Joy-ward or death-ward,
On we march proudly.
That is a storming!

Life in its splendor!
Castles and maidens
Both must surrender.
Daring the venture,
Glorious the pay.
There go the soldiers
Marching away!

FAUST and WAGNER.

Faust.
Spring's warm look has unfettered the fountains,
Brooks go tinkling with silvery feet;
Hope's bright blossoms the valley greet;
Weakly and sickly up the rough mountains
Pale old Winter has made his retreat.
Thence he launches, in sheer despite,
Sleet and hail in impotent showers,
O'er the green lawn as he takes his flight;
But the sun will suffer no white,
Everywhere waking the formative powers,
Living colors he yearns to spread;
Yet, as he finds it too early for flowers,
Gayly dressed people he takes instead.
Look from this height whereon we find us
Back to the town we have left behind us,
Where from the dark and narrow door
Forth a motley multitude pour.
They sun themselves gladly and all are gay,
They celebrate Christ's resurrection to-day.
For have not they themselves arisen?
From smoky huts and hovels and stables,
From labor's bonds and traffic's prison,
From the confinement of roofs and gables,
From many a cramping street and alley,
From churches full of the old world's night,
All have come out to the day's broad light.
See, only see! how the masses sally
Streaming and swarming through gardens and fields
How the broad stream that bathes the valley
Is everywhere cut with pleasure boats' keels,
And that last skiff, so heavily laden,
Almost to sinking, puts off in the stream;
Ribbons and jewels of youngster and maiden
From the far paths of the mountain gleam.
How it hums o'er the fields and clangs from the steeple!
This is the real heaven of the people,
Both great and little are merry and gay,
I am a man, too, I can be, to-day.

Wagner.
With you, Sir Doctor, to go out walking
Is at all times honor and gain enough;
But to trust myself here alone would be shocking,
For I am a foe to all that is rough.
Fiddling and bowling and screams and laughter
To me are the hatefullest noises on earth;
They yell as if Satan himself were after,
And call it music and call it mirth.

[Peasants (under the linden). Dance and song.]

The shepherd prinked him for the dance,
With jacket gay and spangle's glance,
And all his finest quiddle.
And round the linden lass and lad
They wheeled and whirled and danced like mad.
Huzza! huzza!
Huzza! Ha, ha, ha!
And tweedle-dee went the fiddle.

And in he bounded through the whirl,
And with his elbow punched a girl,
Heigh diddle, diddle!
The buxom wench she turned round quick,
"Now that I call a scurvy trick!"
Huzza! huzza!
Huzza! ha, ha, ha!
Tweedle-dee, tweedle-dee went the fiddle.

And petticoats and coat-tails flew
As up and down they went, and through,
Across and down the middle.
They all grew red, they all grew warm,
And rested, panting, arm in arm,
Huzza! huzza!
Ta-ra-la!
Tweedle-dee went the fiddle!

"And don't be so familiar there!
How many a one, with speeches fair,
His trusting maid will diddle!"
But still he flattered her aside--
And from the linden sounded wide:
Huzza! huzza!
Huzza! huzza! ha! ha! ha!
And tweedle-dee the fiddle.

Old Peasant. Sir Doctor, this is kind of you,
That with us here you deign to talk,
And through the crowd of folk to-day
A man so highly larned, walk.
So take the fairest pitcher here,
Which we with freshest drink have filled,
I pledge it to you, praying aloud
That, while your thirst thereby is stilled,
So many days as the drops it contains
May fill out the life that to you remains.

Faust. I take the quickening draught and call
For heaven's best blessing on one and all.

[The people form a circle round him.]

Old Peasant. Your presence with us, this glad day,
We take it very kind, indeed!
In truth we've found you long ere this
In evil days a friend in need!
Full many a one stands living here,
Whom, at death's door already laid,
Your father snatched from fever's rage,
When, by his skill, the plague he stayed.
You, a young man, we daily saw
Go with him to the pest-house then,
And many a corpse was carried forth,
But you came out alive again.
With a charmed life you passed before us,
Helped by the Helper watching o'er us.

All. The well-tried man, and may he live,
Long years a helping hand to give!

Faust. Bow down to Him on high who sends
His heavenly help and helping friends!
[He goes on with WAGNER.]

Wagner. What feelings, O great man, thy heart must swell
Thus to receive a people's veneration!
O worthy all congratulation,
Whose gifts to such advantage tell.
The father to his son shows thee with exultation,
All run and crowd and ask, the circle closer draws,
The fiddle stops, the dancers pause,
Thou goest--the lines fall back for thee.
They fling their gay-decked caps on high;
A little more and they would bow the knee
As if the blessed Host came by.

Faust. A few steps further on, until we reach that stone;
There will we rest us from our wandering.
How oft in prayer and penance there alone,
Fasting, I sate, on holy mysteries pondering.
There, rich in hope, in faith still firm,
I've wept, sighed, wrung my hands and striven
This plague's removal to extort (poor worm!)
From the almighty Lord of Heaven.
The crowd's applause has now a scornful tone;
O couldst thou hear my conscience tell its story,
How little either sire or son
Has done to merit such a glory!
My father was a worthy man, confused
And darkened with his narrow lucubrations,
Who with a whimsical, though well-meant patience,
On Nature's holy circles mused.
Shut up in his black laboratory,
Experimenting without end,
'Midst his adepts, till he grew hoary,
He sought the opposing powers to blend.
Thus, a red lion, a bold suitor, married
The silver lily, in the lukewarm bath,
And, from one bride-bed to another harried,
The two were seen to fly before the flaming wrath.
If then, with colors gay and splendid,
The glass the youthful queen revealed,
Here was the physic, death the patients' sufferings ended,
And no one asked, who then was healed?
Thus, with electuaries so satanic,
Worse than the plague with all its panic,
We rioted through hill and vale;
Myself, with my own hands, the drug to thousands giving,
They passed away, and I am living
To hear men's thanks the murderers hail!

Wagner. Forbear! far other name that service merits!
Can a brave man do more or less
Than with nice conscientiousness
To exercise the calling he inherits?
If thou, as youth, thy father honorest,
To learn from him thou wilt desire;
If thou, as man, men with new light hast blest,
Then may thy son to loftier heights aspire.

Faust. O blest! who hopes to find repose,
Up from this mighty sea of error diving!
Man cannot use what he already knows,
To use the unknown ever striving.
But let not such dark thoughts a shadow throw
O'er the bright joy this hour inspires!
See how the setting sun, with ruddy glow,
The green-embosomed hamlet fires!
He sinks and fades, the day is lived and gone,
He hastens forth new scenes of life to waken.
O for a wing to lift and bear me on,
And on, to where his last rays beckon!
Then should I see the world's calm breast
In everlasting sunset glowing,
The summits all on fire, each valley steeped in rest,
The silver brook to golden rivers flowing.
No savage mountain climbing to the skies
Should stay the godlike course with wild abysses;
And now the sea, with sheltering, warm recesses
Spreads out before the astonished eyes.
At last it seems as if the God were sinking;
But a new impulse fires the mind,
Onward I speed, his endless glory drinking,
The day before me and the night behind,
The heavens above my head and under me the ocean.
A lovely dream,--meanwhile he's gone from sight.
Ah! sure, no earthly wing, in swiftest flight,
May with the spirit's wings hold equal motion.
Yet has each soul an inborn feeling
Impelling it to mount and soar away,
When, lost in heaven's blue depths, the lark is pealing
High overhead her airy lay;
When o'er the mountain pine's black shadow,
With outspread wing the eagle sweeps,
And, steering on o'er lake and meadow,
The crane his homeward journey keeps.

Wagner. I've had myself full many a wayward hour,
But never yet felt such a passion's power.
One soon grows tired of field and wood and brook,
I envy not the fowl of heaven his pinions.
Far nobler joy to soar through thought's dominions
From page to page, from book to book!
Ah! winter nights, so dear to mind and soul!
Warm, blissful life through all the limbs is thrilling,
And when thy hands unfold a genuine ancient scroll,
It seems as if all heaven the room were filling.

Faust.
One passion only has thy heart possessed;
The other, friend, O, learn it never!
Two souls, alas! are lodged in my wild breast,
Which evermore opposing ways endeavor,
The one lives only on the joys of time,
Still to the world with clamp-like organs clinging;
The other leaves this earthly dust and slime,
To fields of sainted sires up-springing.
O, are there spirits in the air,
That empire hold 'twixt earth's and heaven's dominions,
Down from your realm of golden haze repair,
Waft me to new, rich life, upon your rosy pinions!
Ay! were a magic mantle only mine,
To soar o'er earth's wide wildernesses,
I would not sell it for the costliest dresses,
Not for a royal robe the gift resign.

Wagner.
O, call them not, the well known powers of air,
That swarm through all the middle kingdom, weaving
Their fairy webs, with many a fatal snare
The feeble race of men deceiving.
First, the sharp spirit-tooth, from out the North,
And arrowy tongues and fangs come thickly flying;
Then from the East they greedily dart forth,
Sucking thy lungs, thy life-juice drying;
If from the South they come with fever thirst,
Upon thy head noon's fiery splendors heaping;
The Westwind brings a swarm, refreshing first,
Then all thy world with thee in stupor steeping.
They listen gladly, aye on mischief bent,
Gladly draw near, each weak point to espy,
They make believe that they from heaven are sent,
Whispering like angels, while they lie.
But let us go! The earth looks gray, my friend,
The air grows cool, the mists ascend!
At night we learn our homes to prize.--
Why dost thou stop and stare with all thy eyes?
What can so chain thy sight there, in the gloaming?

Faust.
Seest thou that black dog through stalks and stubble roaming?

Wagner.
I saw him some time since, he seemed not strange to me.

Faust.
Look sharply! What dost take the beast to be?

Wagner.
For some poor poodle who has lost his master,
And, dog-like, scents him o'er the ground.

Faust.
Markst thou how, ever nearer, ever faster,
Towards us his spiral track wheels round and round?
And if my senses suffer no confusion,
Behind him trails a fiery glare.

Wagner.
'Tis probably an optical illusion;
I still see only a black poodle there.

Faust.
He seems to me as he were tracing slyly
His magic rings our feet at last to snare.

Wagner.
To me he seems to dart around our steps so shyly,
As if he said: is one of them my master there?

Faust.
The circle narrows, he is near!

Wagner.
Thou seest! a dog we have, no spectre, here!
He growls and stops, crawls on his belly, too,
And wags his tail,--as all dogs do.

Faust.
Come here, sir! come, our comrade be!

Wagner.
He has a poodle's drollery.
Stand still, and he, too, waits to see;
Speak to him, and he jumps on thee;
Lose something, drop thy cane or sling it
Into the stream, he'll run and bring it.

Faust.
I think you're right; I trace no spirit here,
'Tis all the fruit of training, that is clear.

Wagner.
A well-trained dog is a great treasure,
Wise men in such will oft take pleasure.
And he deserves your favor and a collar,
He, of the students the accomplished scholar.

[They go in through the town gate.]
Enter FAUST with the POODLE.

I leave behind me field and meadow
Veiled in the dusk of holy night,
Whose ominous and awful shadow
Awakes the better soul to light.
To sleep are lulled the wild desires,
The hand of passion lies at rest;
The love of man the bosom fires,
The love of God stirs up the breast.

Be quiet, poodle! what worrisome fiend hath possest thee,
Nosing and snuffling so round the door?
Go behind the stove there and rest thee,
There's my best pillow--what wouldst thou more?
As, out on the mountain-paths, frisking and leaping,
Thou, to amuse us, hast done thy best,
So now in return lie still in my keeping,
A quiet, contented, and welcome guest.

When, in our narrow chamber, nightly,
The friendly lamp begins to burn,
Then in the bosom thought beams brightly,
Homeward the heart will then return.
Reason once more bids passion ponder,
Hope blooms again and smiles on man;
Back to life's rills he yearns to wander,
Ah! to the source where life began.

Stop growling, poodle! In the music Elysian
That laps my soul at this holy hour,
These bestial noises have jarring power.
We know that men will treat with derision
Whatever they cannot understand,
At goodness and truth and beauty's vision
Will shut their eyes and murmur and howl at it;
And must the dog, too, snarl and growl at it?

But ah, with the best will, I feel already,
No peace will well up in me, clear and steady.
But why must hope so soon deceive us,
And the dried-up stream in fever leave us?
For in this I have had a full probation.
And yet for this want a supply is provided,
To a higher than earth the soul is guided,
We are ready and yearn for revelation:
And where are its light and warmth so blent
As here in the New Testament?
I feel, this moment, a mighty yearning
To expound for once the ground text of all,
The venerable original
Into my own loved German honestly turning.
[He opens the volume, and applies himself to the task.]
"In the beginning was the Word." I read.
But here I stick! Who helps me to proceed?
The Word--so high I cannot--dare not, rate it,
I must, then, otherwise translate it,
If by the spirit I am rightly taught.
It reads: "In the beginning was the thought."
But study well this first line's lesson,
Nor let thy pen to error overhasten!
Is it the thought does all from time's first hour?
"In the beginning," read then, "was the power."
Yet even while I write it down, my finger
Is checked, a voice forbids me there to linger.
The spirit helps! At once I dare to read
And write: "In the beginning was the deed."

If I with thee must share my chamber,
Poodle, now, remember,
No more howling,
No more growling!
I had as lief a bull should bellow,
As have for a chum such a noisy fellow.
Stop that yell, now,
One of us must quit this cell now!
'Tis hard to retract hospitality,
But the door is open, thy way is free.
But what ails the creature?
Is this in the course of nature?
Is it real? or one of Fancy's shows?

How long and broad my poodle grows!
He rises from the ground;
That is no longer the form of a hound!
Heaven avert the curse from us!
He looks like a hippopotamus,
With his fiery eyes and the terrible white
Of his grinning teeth! oh what a fright
Have I brought with me into the house! Ah now,
No mystery art thou!
Methinks for such half hellish brood
The key of Solomon were good.

Spirits [in the passage].
Softly! a fellow is caught there!
Keep back, all of you, follow him not there!
Like the fox in the trap,
Mourns the old hell-lynx his mishap.
But give ye good heed!
This way hover, that way hover,
Over and over,
And he shall right soon be freed.
Help can you give him,
O do not leave him!
Many good turns he's done us,
Many a fortune won us.

Faust.
First, to encounter the creature
By the spell of the Four, says the teacher:
Salamander shall glisten,
Undina lapse lightly,
Sylph vanish brightly,
Kobold quick listen.

He to whom Nature
Shows not, as teacher,
Every force
And secret source,
Over the spirits
No power inherits.

Vanish in glowing
Flame, Salamander!
Inward, spirally flowing,
Gurgle, Undine!
Gleam in meteoric splendor,
Airy Queen!
Thy homely help render,
Incubus! Incubus!
Forth and end the charm for us!

No kingdom of Nature
Resides in the creature.
He lies there grinning--'tis clear, my charm
Has done the monster no mite of harm.
I'll try, for thy curing,
Stronger adjuring.

Art thou a jail-bird,
A runaway hell-bird?
This sign, then--adore it!
They tremble before it
All through the dark dwelling.

His hair is bristling--his body swelling.

Reprobate creature!
Canst read his nature?
The Uncreated,
Ineffably Holy,
With Deity mated,
Sin's victim lowly?

Driven behind the stove by my spells,
Like an elephant he swells;
He fills the whole room, so huge he's grown,
He waxes shadowy faster and faster.
Rise not up to the ceiling--down!
Lay thyself at the feet of thy master!
Thou seest, there's reason to dread my ire.
I'll scorch thee with the holy fire!
Wait not for the sight
Of the thrice-glowing light!
Wait not to feel the might
Of the potentest spell in all my treasure!

MEPHISTOPHELES.
[As the mist sinks, steps forth from behind the stove,
dressed as a travelling scholasticus.]
Why all this noise? What is your worship's pleasure?

Faust.
This was the poodle's essence then!
A travelling clark? Ha! ha! The casus is too funny.

Mephistopheles.
I bow to the most learned among men!
'Faith you did sweat me without ceremony.

Faust.
What is thy name?

Mephistopheles.
The question seems too small
For one who holds the word so very cheaply,
Who, far removed from shadows all,
For substances alone seeks deeply.

Faust.
With gentlemen like him in my presence,
The name is apt to express the essence,
Especially if, when you inquire,
You find it God of flies, Destroyer, Slanderer, Liar.
Well now, who art thou then?

Mephistopheles.
A portion of that power,
Which wills the bad and works the good at every hour.

Faust.
Beneath thy riddle-word what meaning lies?

Mephistopheles.
I am the spirit that denies!
And justly so; for all that time creates,
He does well who annihilates!
Better, it ne'er had had beginning;
And so, then, all that you call sinning,
Destruction,--all you pronounce ill-meant,--
Is my original element.

Faust.
Thou call'st thyself a part, yet lookst complete to me.

Mephistopheles.
I speak the modest truth to thee.
A world of folly in one little soul,
Man loves to think himself a whole;
Part of the part am I, which once was all, the Gloom
That brought forth Light itself from out her mighty womb,
The upstart proud, that now with mother Night
Disputes her ancient rank and space and right,
Yet never shall prevail, since, do whate'er he will,
He cleaves, a slave, to bodies still;
From bodies flows, makes bodies fair to sight;
A body in his course can check him,
His doom, I therefore hope, will soon o'ertake him,
With bodies merged in nothingness and night.

Faust.
Ah, now I see thy high vocation!
In gross thou canst not harm creation,
And so in small hast now begun.

Mephistopheles.
And, truth to tell, e'en here, not much have done.
That which at nothing the gauntlet has hurled,
This, what's its name? this clumsy world,
So far as I have undertaken,
I have to own, remains unshaken
By wave, storm, earthquake, fiery brand.
Calm, after all, remain both sea and land.
And the damn'd living fluff, of man and beast the brood,
It laughs to scorn my utmost power.
I've buried myriads by the hour,
And still there circulates each hour a new, fresh blood.
It were enough to drive one to distraction!
Earth, water, air, in constant action,
Through moist and dry, through warm and cold,
Going forth in endless germination!
Had I not claimed of fire a reservation,
Not one thing I alone should hold.

Faust.
Thus, with the ever-working power
Of good dost thou in strife persist,
And in vain malice, to this hour,
Clenchest thy cold and devilish fist!
Go try some other occupation,
Singular son of Chaos, thou!

Mephistopheles.
We'll give the thing consideration,
When next we meet again! But now
Might I for once, with leave retire?

Faust.
Why thou shouldst ask I do not see.
Now that I know thee, when desire
Shall prompt thee, freely visit me.
Window and door give free admission.
At least there's left the chimney flue.

Mephistopheles.
Let me confess there's one small prohibition

Lies on thy threshold, 'gainst my walking through,
The wizard-foot--

Faust.
Does that delay thee?
The Pentagram disturbs thee? Now,
Come tell me, son of hell, I pray thee,
If that spell-binds thee, then how enteredst thou?
Thou shouldst proceed more circumspectly!

Mephistopheles.
Mark well! the figure is not drawn correctly;
One of the angles, 'tis the outer one,
Is somewhat open, dost perceive it?

Faust.
That was a lucky hit, believe it!
And I have caught thee then? Well done!
'Twas wholly chance--I'm quite astounded!

Mephistopheles.
The poodle took no heed,
as through the door he bounded;
The case looks differently now;
The devil can leave the house no-how.

Faust.
The window offers free emission.

Mephistopheles.
Devils and ghosts are bound by this condition:

The way they entered in, they must come out. Allow
In the first clause we're free, yet not so in the second.

Faust.
In hell itself, then, laws are reckoned?
Now that I like; so then, one may, in fact,
Conclude a binding compact with you gentry?

Mephistopheles.
Whatever promise on our books finds entry,
We strictly carry into act.
But hereby hangs a grave condition,
Of this we'll talk when next we meet;
But for the present I entreat
Most urgently your kind dismission.

Faust.
Do stay but just one moment longer, then,
Tell me good news and I'll release thee.

Mephistopheles.
Let me go now! I'll soon come back again,
Then may'st thou ask whate'er shall please thee.

Faust.
I laid no snare for thee, old chap!
Thou shouldst have watched and saved thy bacon.
Who has the devil in his trap
Must hold him fast, next time he'll not so soon be taken.

Mephistopheles.
Well, if it please thee, I'm content to stay
For company, on one condition,
That I, for thy amusement, may
To exercise my arts have free permission.

Faust.
I gladly grant it, if they be
Not disagreeable to me.

Mephistopheles.
Thy senses, friend, in this one hour
Shall grasp the world with clearer power
Than in a year's monotony.
The songs the tender spirits sing thee,
The lovely images they bring thee
Are not an idle magic play.
Thou shalt enjoy the daintiest savor,
Then feast thy taste on richest flavor,
Then thy charmed heart shall melt away.
Come, all are here, and all have been
Well trained and practised, now begin!

Spirits.
Vanish, ye gloomy
Vaulted abysses!
Tenderer, clearer,
Friendlier, nearer,
Ether, look through!
O that the darkling
Cloud-piles were riven!
Starlight is sparkling,
Purer is heaven,
Holier sunshine
Softens the blue.
Graces, adorning
Sons of the morning--
Shadowy wavings--
Float along over;
Yearnings and cravings
After them hover.
Garments ethereal,
Tresses aerial,
Float o'er the flowers,
Float o'er the bowers,
Where, with deep feeling,
Thoughtful and tender,
Lovers, embracing,
Life-vows are sealing.
Bowers on bowers!
Graceful and slender
Vines interlacing!
Purple and blushing,
Under the crushing
Wine-presses gushing,
Grape-blood, o'erflowing,
Down over gleaming
Precious stones streaming,
Leaves the bright glowing
Tops of the mountains,
Leaves the red fountains,
Widening and rushing,
Till it encloses
Green hills all flushing,
Laden with roses.
Happy ones, swarming,
Ply their swift pinions,
Glide through the charming
Airy dominions,
Sunward still fleering,
Onward, where peering
Far o'er the ocean,
Islets are dancing
With an entrancing,
Magical motion;
Hear them, in chorus,
Singing high o'er us;
Over the meadows
Flit the bright shadows;
Glad eyes are glancing,
Tiny feet dancing.
Up the high ridges
Some of them clamber,
Others are skimming
Sky-lakes of amber,
Others are swimming
Over the ocean;--
All are in motion,
Life-ward all yearning,
Longingly turning
To the far-burning
Star-light of bliss.

Mephistopheles.
He sleeps! Ye airy, tender youths, your numbers
Have sung him into sweetest slumbers!
You put me greatly in your debt by this.
Thou art not yet the man that shall hold fast the devil!
Still cheat his senses with your magic revel,
Drown him in dreams of endless youth;
But this charm-mountain on the sill to level,
I need, O rat, thy pointed tooth!
Nor need I conjure long, they're near me,
E'en now comes scampering one, who presently will hear me.

The sovereign lord of rats and mice,
Of flies and frogs and bugs and lice,
Commands thee to come forth this hour,
And gnaw this threshold with great power,
As he with oil the same shall smear--
Ha! with a skip e'en now thou'rt here!
But brisk to work! The point by which I'm cowered,
Is on the ledge, the farthest forward.
Yet one more bite, the deed is done.--
Now, Faust, until we meet again, dream on!

Faust.
[Waking.] Again has witchcraft triumphed o'er me?
Was it a ghostly show, so soon withdrawn?
I dream, the devil stands himself before me--wake, to find a poodle gone!
FAUST. MEPHISTOPHELES.

Faust.
A knock? Walk in! Who comes again to tease me?

Mephistopheles.
'Tis I.

Faust.
Come in!

Mephistopheles.
Must say it thrice, to please me.

Faust.
Come in then!

Mephistopheles.
That I like to hear.
We shall, I hope, bear with each other;
For to dispel thy crotchets, brother,
As a young lord, I now appear,
In scarlet dress, trimmed with gold lacing,
A stiff silk cloak with stylish facing,
A tall cock's feather in my hat,
A long, sharp rapier to defend me,
And I advise thee, short and flat,
In the same costume to attend me;
If thou wouldst, unembarrassed, see
What sort of thing this life may be.

Faust.
In every dress I well may feel the sore
Of this low earth-life's melancholy.
I am too old to live for folly,
Too young, to wish for nothing more.
Am I content with all creation?
Renounce! renounce! Renunciation--
Such is the everlasting song
That in the ears of all men rings,
Which every hour, our whole life long,
With brazen accents hoarsely sings.
With terror I behold each morning's light,
With bitter tears my eyes are filling,
To see the day that shall not in its flight
Fulfil for me one wish, not one, but killing
Every presentiment of zest
With wayward skepticism, chases
The fair creations from my breast
With all life's thousand cold grimaces.
And when at night I stretch me on my bed
And darkness spreads its shadow o'er me;
No rest comes then anigh my weary head,
Wild dreams and spectres dance before me.
The God who dwells within my soul
Can heave its depths at any hour;
Who holds o'er all my faculties control
Has o'er the outer world no power;
Existence lies a load upon my breast,
Life is a curse and death a long'd-for rest.

Mephistopheles.
And yet death never proves a wholly welcome guest.

Faust.
O blest! for whom, when victory's joy fire blazes,
Death round his brow the bloody laurel windeth,
Whom, weary with the dance's mazes,
He on a maiden's bosom findeth.
O that, beneath the exalted spirit's power,
I had expired, in rapture sinking!

Mephistopheles.
And yet I knew one, in a midnight hour,
Who a brown liquid shrank from drinking.

Faust.
Eaves-dropping seems a favorite game with thee.

Mephistopheles.
Omniscient am I not; yet much is known to me.

Faust.
Since that sweet tone, with fond appealing,
Drew me from witchcraft's horrid maze,
And woke the lingering childlike feeling
With harmonies of happier days;
My curse on all the mock-creations
That weave their spell around the soul,
And bind it with their incantations
And orgies to this wretched hole!
Accursed be the high opinion
Hugged by the self-exalting mind!
Accursed all the dream-dominion
That makes the dazzled senses blind!
Curs'd be each vision that befools us,
Of fame, outlasting earthly life!
Curs'd all that, as possession, rules us,
As house and barn, as child and wife!
Accurs'd be mammon, when with treasure
He fires our hearts for deeds of might,
When, for a dream of idle pleasure,
He makes our pillow smooth and light!
Curs'd be the grape-vine's balsam-juices!
On love's high grace my curses fall!
On faith! On hope that man seduces,
On patience last, not least, of all!

Choir of spirits.
[Invisible.] Woe! Woe!
Thou hast ground it to dust,
The beautiful world,
With mighty fist;
To ruins 'tis hurled;
A demi-god's blow hath done it!
A moment we look upon it,
Then carry (sad duty!)
The fragments over into nothingness,
With tears unavailing
Bewailing
All the departed beauty.
Lordlier
Than all sons of men,
Proudlier
Build it again,
Build it up in thy breast anew!
A fresh career pursue,
Before thee
A clearer view,
And, from the Empyran,
A new-born Paean
Shall greet thee, too!

Mephistopheles.
Be pleased to admire
My juvenile choir!
Hear how they counsel in manly measure
Action and pleasure!
Out into life,
Its joy and strife,
Away from this lonely hole,
Where senses and soul
Rot in stagnation,
Calls thee their high invitation.

Give over toying with thy sorrow
Which like a vulture feeds upon thy heart;
Thou shalt, in the worst company, to-morrow
Feel that with men a man thou art.
Yet I do not exactly intend
Among the canaille to plant thee.
I'm none of your magnates, I grant thee;
Yet if thou art willing, my friend,
Through life to jog on beside me,
Thy pleasure in all things shall guide me,
To thee will I bind me,
A friend thou shalt find me,
And, e'en to the grave,
Shalt make me thy servant, make me thy slave!

Faust.
And in return what service shall I render?

Mephistopheles.
There's ample grace--no hurry, not the least.

Faust.
No, no, the devil is an egotist,
And does not easily "for God's sake" tender
That which a neighbor may assist.
Speak plainly the conditions, come!
'Tis dangerous taking such a servant home.

Mephistopheles.
I to thy service here agree to bind me,
To run and never rest at call of thee;
When over yonder thou shalt find me,
Then thou shalt do as much for me.

Faust.
I care not much what's over yonder:
When thou hast knocked this world asunder,
Come if it will the other may!
Up from this earth my pleasures all are streaming,
Down on my woes this earthly sun is beaming;
Let me but end this fit of dreaming,
Then come what will, I've nought to say.
I'll hear no more of barren wonder
If in that world they hate and love,
And whether in that future yonder
There's a Below and an Above.

Mephistopheles. In such a mood thou well mayst venture.
Bind thyself to me, and by this indenture
Thou shalt enjoy with relish keen
Fruits of my arts that man had never seen.

Faust.
And what hast thou to give, poor devil?
Was e'er a human mind, upon its lofty level,
Conceived of by the like of thee?
Yet hast thou food that brings satiety,
Not satisfaction; gold that reftlessly,
Like quicksilver, melts down within
The hands; a game in which men never win;
A maid that, hanging on my breast,
Ogles a neighbor with her wanton glances;
Of fame the glorious godlike zest,
That like a short-lived meteor dances--
Show me the fruit that, ere it's plucked, will rot,
And trees from which new green is daily peeping!

Mephistopheles.
Such a requirement scares me not;
Such treasures have I in my keeping.
Yet shall there also come a time, good friend,
When we may feast on good things at our leisure.

Faust.
If e'er I lie content upon a lounge of pleasure--
Then let there be of me an end!
When thou with flattery canst cajole me,
Till I self-satisfied shall be,
When thou with pleasure canst befool me,
Be that the last of days for me!
I lay the wager!

Mephistopheles.
Done!

Faust.
And heartily!
Whenever to the passing hour
I cry: O stay! thou art so fair!
To chain me down I give thee power
To the black bottom of despair!
Then let my knell no longer linger,
Then from my service thou art free,
Fall from the clock the index-finger,
Be time all over, then, for me!

Mephistopheles.
Think well, for we shall hold you to the letter.

Faust.
Full right to that just now I gave;
I spoke not as an idle braggart better.
Henceforward I remain a slave,
What care I who puts on the setter?

Mephistopheles.
I shall this very day, at Doctor's-feast,
My bounden service duly pay thee.
But one thing!--For insurance' sake, I pray thee,
Grant me a line or two, at least.

Faust.
Pedant! will writing gain thy faith, alone?
In all thy life, no man, nor man's word hast thou known?
Is't not enough that I the fatal word
That passes on my future days have spoken?
The world-stream raves and rushes (hast not heard?)
And shall a promise hold, unbroken?
Yet this delusion haunts the human breast,
Who from his soul its roots would sever?
Thrice happy in whose heart pure truth finds rest.
No sacrifice shall he repent of ever!
But from a formal, written, sealed attest,
As from a spectre, all men shrink forever.
The word and spirit die together,
Killed by the sight of wax and leather.
What wilt thou, evil sprite, from me?
Brass, marble, parchment, paper, shall it be?
Shall I subscribe with pencil, pen or graver?
Among them all thy choice is free.

Mephistopheles.
This rhetoric of thine to me
Hath a somewhat bombastic savor.
Any small scrap of paper's good.
Thy signature will need a single drop of blood.

Faust.
If this will satisfy thy mood,
I will consent thy whim to favor.

Mephistopheles. Quite a peculiar juice is blood.

Faust.
Fear not that I shall break this bond; O, never!
My promise, rightly understood,
Fulfils my nature's whole endeavor.
I've puffed myself too high, I see;
To thy rank only I belong.
The Lord of Spirits scorneth me,
Nature, shut up, resents the wrong.
The thread of thought is snapt asunder,
All science to me is a stupid blunder.
Let us in sensuality's deep
Quench the passions within us blazing!
And, the veil of sorcery raising,
Wake each miracle from its long sleep!
Plunge we into the billowy dance,
The rush and roll of time and chance!
Then may pleasure and distress,
Disappointment and success,
Follow each other as fast as they will;
Man's restless activity flourishes still.

Mephistopheles.
No bound or goal is set to you;
Where'er you like to wander sipping,
And catch a tit-bit in your skipping,
Eschew all coyness, just fall to,
And may you find a good digestion!

Faust.
Now, once for all, pleasure is not the question.
I'm sworn to passion's whirl, the agony of bliss,
The lover's hate, the sweets of bitterness.
My heart, no more by pride of science driven,
Shall open wide to let each sorrow enter,
And all the good that to man's race is given,
I will enjoy it to my being's centre,
Through life's whole range, upward and downward sweeping,
Their weal and woe upon my bosom heaping,
Thus in my single self their selves all comprehending
And with them in a common shipwreck ending.

Mephistopheles.
O trust me, who since first I fell from heaven,
Have chewed this tough meat many a thousand year,
No man digests the ancient leaven,
No mortal, from the cradle to the bier.
Trust one of us--the whole creation
To God alone belongs by right;
He has in endless day his habitation,
Us He hath made for utter night,
You for alternate dark and light.

Faust.
But then I will!

Mephistopheles.
Now that's worth hearing!
But one thing haunts me, the old song,
That time is short and art is long.
You need some slight advice, I'm fearing.
Take to you one of the poet-feather,
Let the gentleman's thought, far-sweeping,
Bring all the noblest traits together,
On your one crown their honors heaping,
The lion's mood
The stag's rapidity,
The fiery blood of Italy,
The Northman's hardihood.
Bid him teach thee the art of combining
Greatness of soul with fly designing,
And how, with warm and youthful passion,
To fall in love by plan and fashion.
Should like, myself, to come across 'm,
Would name him Mr. Microcosm.

Faust.
What am I then? if that for which my heart
Yearns with invincible endeavor,
The crown of man, must hang unreached forever?

Mephistopheles.
Thou art at last--just what thou art.
Pile perukes on thy head whose curls cannot be counted,
On yard-high buskins let thy feet be mounted,
Still thou art only what thou art.

Faust.
Yes, I have vainly, let me not deny it,
Of human learning ransacked all the stores,
And when, at last, I set me down in quiet,
There gushes up within no new-born force;
I am not by a hair's-breadth higher,
Am to the Infinite no nigher.

Mephistopheles.
My worthy sir, you see the matter
As people generally see;
But we must learn to take things better,
Before life pleasures wholly flee.
The deuce! thy head and all that's in it,
Hands, feet and ------ are thine;
What I enjoy with zest each minute,
Is surely not the less mine?
If I've six horses in my span,
Is it not mine, their every power?
I fly along as an undoubted man,
On four and twenty legs the road I scour.
Cheer up, then! let all thinking be,
And out into the world with me!
I tell thee, friend, a speculating churl
Is like a beast, some evil spirit chases
Along a barren heath in one perpetual whirl,
While round about lie fair, green pasturing places.

Faust.
But how shall we begin?

Mephistopheles.
We sally forth e'en now.
What martyrdom endurest thou!
What kind of life is this to be living,
Ennui to thyself and youngsters giving?
Let Neighbor Belly that way go!
To stay here threshing straw why car'st thou?
The best that thou canst think and know
To tell the boys not for the whole world dar'st thou.
E'en now I hear one in the entry.

Faust.
I have no heart the youth to see.

Mephistopheles.
The poor boy waits there like a sentry,
He shall not want a word from me.
Come, give me, now, thy robe and bonnet;
This mask will suit me charmingly.
[He puts them on.]
Now for my wit--rely upon it!
'Twill take but fifteen minutes, I am sure.
Meanwhile prepare thyself to make the pleasant tour!

[Exit FAUST.]

Mephistopheles [in FAUST'S long gown].
Only despise all human wit and lore,
The highest flights that thought can soar--
Let but the lying spirit blind thee,
And with his spells of witchcraft bind thee,
Into my snare the victim creeps.--
To him has destiny a spirit given,
That unrestrainedly still onward sweeps,
To scale the skies long since hath striven,
And all earth's pleasures overleaps.
He shall through life's wild scenes be driven,
And through its flat unmeaningness,
I'll make him writhe and stare and stiffen,
And midst all sensual excess,
His fevered lips, with thirst all parched and riven,
Insatiably shall haunt refreshment's brink;
And had he not, himself, his soul to Satan given,
Still must he to perdition sink!

[Enter A SCHOLAR.]

Scholar.
I have but lately left my home,
And with profound submission come,
To hold with one some conversation
Whom all men name with veneration.

Mephistopheles. Your courtesy greatly flatters me
A man like many another you see.
Have you made any applications elsewhere?

Scholar.
Let me, I pray, your teachings share!
With all good dispositions I come,
A fresh young blood and money some;
My mother would hardly hear of my going;
But I long to learn here something worth knowing.

Mephistopheles.
You've come to the very place for it, then.

Scholar.
Sincerely, could wish I were off again:
My soul already has grown quite weary
Of walls and halls, so dark and dreary,
The narrowness oppresses me.
One sees no green thing, not a tree.
On the lecture-seats, I know not what ails me,
Sight, hearing, thinking, every thing fails me.

Mephistopheles.
'Tis all in use, we daily see.
The child takes not the mother's breast
In the first instance willingly,
But soon it feeds itself with zest.
So you at wisdom's breast your pleasure
Will daily find in growing measure.

Scholar.
I'll hang upon her neck, a raptured wooer,
But only tell me, who shall lead me to her?

Mephistopheles.
Ere you go further, give your views
As to which faculty you choose?

Scholar.
To be right learn'd I've long desired,
And of the natural world aspired
To have a perfect comprehension
In this and in the heavenly sphere.

Mephistopheles.
I see you're on the right track here;
But you'll have to give undivided attention.

Scholar.
My heart and soul in the work'll be found;
Only, of course, it would give me pleasure,
When summer holidays come round,
To have for amusement a little leisure.

Mephistopheles.
Use well the precious time, it flips away so,
Yet method gains you time, if I may say so.
I counsel you therefore, my worthy friend,
The logical leisures first to attend.
Then is your mind well trained and cased
In Spanish boots, all snugly laced,
So that henceforth it can creep ahead
On the road of thought with a cautious tread.
And not at random shoot and strike,
Zig-zagging Jack-o'-lanthorn-like.
Then will you many a day be taught
That what you once to do had thought
Like eating and drinking, extempore,
Requires the rule of one, two, three.
It is, to be sure, with the fabric of thought,
As with the chef d'uvre by weavers wrought,
Where a thousand threads one treadle plies,
Backward and forward the shuttles keep going,
Invisibly the threads keep flowing,
One stroke a thousand fastenings ties:
Comes the philosopher and cries:
I'll show you, it could not be otherwise:
The first being so, the second so,
The third and fourth must of course be so;
And were not the first and second, you see,
The third and fourth could never be.
The scholars everywhere call this clever,
But none have yet become weavers ever.
Whoever will know a live thing and expound it,
First kills out the spirit it had when he found it,
And then the parts are all in his hand,
Minus only the spiritual band!
Encheiresin natur's the chemical name,
By which dunces themselves unwittingly shame.

Scholar.
Cannot entirely comprehend you.

Mephistopheles.
Better success will shortly attend you,
When you learn to analyze all creation
And give it a proper classification.

Scholar.
I feel as confused by all you've said,
As if 'twere a mill-wheel going round in my head!

Mephistopheles.
The next thing most important to mention,
Metaphysics will claim your attention!
There see that you can clearly explain
What fits not into the human brain:
For that which will not go into the head,
A pompous word will stand you in stead.
But, this half-year, at least, observe
From regularity never to swerve.
You'll have five lectures every day;
Be in at the stroke of the bell I pray!
And well prepared in every part;
Study each paragraph by heart,
So that you scarce may need to look
To see that he says no more than's in the book;
And when he dictates, be at your post,
As if you wrote for the Holy Ghost!

Scholar.
That caution is unnecessary!
I know it profits one to write,
For what one has in black and white,
He to his home can safely carry.

Mephistopheles.
But choose some faculty, I pray!

Scholar.
I feel a strong dislike to try the legal college.

Mephistopheles.
I cannot blame you much, I must acknowledge.
I know how this profession stands to-day.
Statutes and laws through all the ages
Like a transmitted malady you trace;
In every generation still it rages
And softly creeps from place to place.
Reason is nonsense, right an impudent suggestion;
Alas for thee, that thou a grandson art!
Of inborn law in which each man has part,
Of that, unfortunately, there's no question.

Scholar.
My loathing grows beneath your speech.
O happy he whom you shall teach!
To try theology I'm almost minded.

Mephistopheles.
I must not let you by zeal be blinded.
This is a science through whose field
Nine out of ten in the wrong road will blunder,
And in it so much poison lies concealed,
That mould you this mistake for physic, no great wonder.
Here also it were best, if only one you heard
And swore to that one master's word.
Upon the whole--words only heed you!
These through the temple door will lead you
Safe to the shrine of certainty.

Scholar.
Yet in the word a thought must surely be.

Mephistopheles.
All right! But one must not perplex himself about it;
For just where one must go without it,
The word comes in, a friend in need, to thee.
With words can one dispute most featly,
With words build up a system neatly,
In words thy faith may stand unshaken,
From words there can be no iota taken.

Scholar.
Forgive my keeping you with many questions,
Yet must I trouble you once more,
Will you not give me, on the score
Of medicine, some brief suggestions?
Three years are a short time, O God!
And then the field is quite too broad.
If one had only before his nose
Something else as a hint to follow!--

Mephistopheles [aside].
I'm heartily tired of this dry prose,
Must play the devil again out hollow.
[Aloud.]
The healing art is quickly comprehended;
Through great and little world you look abroad,
And let it wag, when all is ended,
As pleases God.
Vain is it that your science sweeps the skies,
Each, after all, learns only what he can;
Who grasps the moment as it flies
He is the real man.
Your person somewhat takes the eye,
Boldness you'll find an easy science,
And if you on yourself rely,
Others on you will place reliance.
In the women's good graces seek first to be seated;
Their oh's and ah's, well known of old,
So thousand-fold,
Are all from a single point to be treated;
Be decently modest and then with ease
You may get the blind side of them when you please.
A title, first, their confidence must waken,
That your art many another art transcends,
Then may you, lucky man, on all those trifles reckon
For which another years of groping spends:
Know how to press the little pulse that dances,
And fearlessly, with sly and fiery glances,
Clasp the dear creatures round the waist
To see how tightly they are laced.

Scholar.
This promises! One loves the How and Where to see!

Mephistopheles.
Gray, worthy friend, is all your theory
And green the golden tree of life.

Scholar.
I seem,
I swear to you, like one who walks in dream.
Might I another time, without encroaching,
Hear you the deepest things of wisdom broaching?

Mephistopheles.
So far as I have power, you may.

Scholar.
I cannot tear myself away,
Till I to you my album have presented.
Grant me one line and I'm contented!

Mephistopheles.
With pleasure.
[Writes and returns it.]

Scholar [reads]. Eritis sicut Deus, scientes bonum et malum.
[Shuts it reverently, and bows himself out.]

Mephistopheles.

Let but the brave old saw and my aunt, the serpent, guide thee,
And, with thy likeness to God, shall woe one day betide thee!

Faust [enters].
Which way now shall we go?

Mephistopheles.
Which way it pleases thee.
The little world and then the great we see.
O with what gain, as well as pleasure,
Wilt thou the rollicking cursus measure!

Faust.
I fear the easy life and free
With my long beard will scarce agree.
'Tis vain for me to think of succeeding,
I never could learn what is called good-breeding.
In the presence of others I feel so small;
I never can be at my ease at all.

Mephistopheles.
Dear friend, vain trouble to yourself you're giving;
Whence once you trust yourself, you know the art of living.

Faust.
But how are we to start, I pray?
Where are thy servants, coach and horses?

Mephistopheles.
We spread the mantle, and away
It bears us on our airy courses.
But, on this bold excursion, thou
Must take no great portmanteau now.
A little oxygen, which I will soon make ready,
From earth uplifts us, quick and steady.
And if we're light, we'll soon surmount the sphere;
I give thee hearty joy in this thy new career.
Carousal of Jolly Companions.

Frosch.
Will nobody drink? Stop those grimaces!
I'll teach you how to be cutting your faces!
Laugh out! You're like wet straw to-day,
And blaze, at other times, like dry hay.

Brander.
'Tis all your fault; no food for fun you bring,
Not a nonsensical nor nasty thing.

Frosch [dashes a glass of wine over his bead].
There you have both!

Brander.
You hog twice o'er!

Frosch.
You wanted it, what would you more?

Siebel Out of the door with them that brawl!
Strike up a round; swill, shout there, one and all!
Wake up! Hurra!

Altmayer.
Woe's me, I'm lost! Bring cotton!
The rascal splits my ear-drum.

Siebel.
Only shout on!
When all the arches ring and yell,
Then does the base make felt its true ground-swell.

Frosch.
That's right, just throw him out, who undertakes to fret!
A! tara! lara da!

Altmayer.
A! tara! lara da!

Frosch.
Our whistles all are wet.
[Sings.]
The dear old holy Romish realm,
What holds it still together?

Brander.
A sorry song! Fie! a political song!
A tiresome song! Thank God each morning therefor,
That you have not the Romish realm to care for!
At least I count it a great gain that He
Kaiser nor chancellor has made of me.
E'en we can't do without a head, however;
To choose a pope let us endeavour.
You know what qualification throws
The casting vote and the true man shows.

Frosch [sings].
Lady Nightingale, upward soar,
Greet me my darling ten thousand times o'er.

Siebel.
No greetings to that girl! Who does so, I resent it!

Frosch.
A greeting and a kiss! And you will not prevent it!
[Sings.]
Draw the bolts! the night is clear.
Draw the bolts! Love watches near.
Close the bolts! the dawn is here.

Siebel.
Ay, sing away and praise and glorify your dear!
Soon I shall have my time for laughter.
The jade has jilted me, and will you too hereafter;
May Kobold, for a lover, be her luck!
At night may he upon the cross-way meet her;
Or, coming from the Blocksberg, some old buck
May, as he gallops by, a good-night bleat her!
A fellow fine of real flesh and blood
Is for the wench a deal too good.
She'll get from me but one love-token,
That is to have her window broken!

Brander [striking on the table].
Attend! attend! To me give ear!
I know what's life, ye gents, confess it:
We've lovesick people sitting near,
And it is proper they should hear
A good-night strain as well as I can dress it.
Give heed! And hear a bran-new song!
Join in the chorus loud and strong!
[He sings.]
A rat in the cellar had built his nest,
He daily grew sleeker and smoother,
He lined his paunch from larder and chest,
And was portly as Doctor Luther.
The cook had set him poison one day;
From that time forward he pined away
As if he had love in his body.

Chorus [flouting].
As if he had love in his body.

Brander.
He raced about with a terrible touse,
From all the puddles went swilling,
He gnawed and he scratched all over the house,
His pain there was no stilling;
He made full many a jump of distress,
And soon the poor beast got enough, I guess,
As if he had love in his body.

Chorus.
As if he had love in his body.

Brander.
With pain he ran, in open day,
Right up into the kitchen;
He fell on the hearth and there he lay
Gasping and moaning and twitchin'.
Then laughed the poisoner: "He! he! he!
He's piping on the last hole," said she,
"As if he had love in his body."

Chorus.
As if he had love in his body.

Siebel.
Just hear now how the ninnies giggle!
That's what I call a genuine art,
To make poor rats with poison wriggle!

Brander.
You take their case so much to heart?

Altmayer.
The bald pate and the butter-belly!
The sad tale makes him mild and tame;
He sees in the swollen rat, poor fellow!
His own true likeness set in a frame.

FAUST and MEPHISTOPHELES.

Mephistopheles.
Now, first of all, 'tis necessary
To show you people making merry,
That you may see how lightly life can run.
Each day to this small folk's a feast of fun;
Not over-witty, self-contented,
Still round and round in circle-dance they whirl,
As with their tails young kittens twirl.
If with no headache they're tormented,
Nor dunned by landlord for his pay,
They're careless, unconcerned, and gay.

Brander.
They're fresh from travel, one might know it,
Their air and manner plainly show it;
They came here not an hour ago.

Frosch.
Thou verily art right! My Leipsic well I know!
Paris in small it is, and cultivates its people.

Siebel.
What do the strangers seem to thee?

Frosch.
Just let me go! When wine our friendship mellows,
Easy as drawing a child's tooth 'twill be
To worm their secrets out of these two fellows.
They're of a noble house, I dare to swear,
They have a proud and discontented air.

Brander.
They're mountebanks, I'll bet a dollar!

Altmayer.
Perhaps.

Frosch.
I'll smoke them, mark you that!

Mephistopheles [to Faust].
These people never smell the old rat,
E'en when he has them by the collar.

Faust.
Fair greeting to you, sirs!

Siebel.
The same, and thanks to boot.
[In a low tone, faking a side look at MEPHISTOPHELES.]
Why has the churl one halting foot?

Mephistopheles.
With your permission, shall we make one party?
Instead of a good drink, which get here no one can,
Good company must make us hearty.

Altmayer.
You seem a very fastidious man.

Frosch.
I think you spent some time at Rippach lately?
You supped with Mister Hans not long since, I dare say?

Mephistopheles.
We passed him on the road today!
Fine man! it grieved us parting with him, greatly.
He'd much to say to us about his cousins,
And sent to each, through us, his compliments by dozens.
[He bows to FROSCH.]

Altmayer [softly].
You've got it there! he takes!

Siebel.
The chap don't want for wit!

Frosch.
I'll have him next time, wait a bit!

Mephistopheles.
If I mistook not, didn't we hear
Some well-trained voices chorus singing?
'Faith, music must sound finely here.
From all these echoing arches ringing!

Frosch.
You are perhaps a connoisseur?

Mephistopheles.
O no! my powers are small, I'm but an amateur.

Altmayer.
Give us a song!

Mephistopheles.
As many's you desire.

Siebel.
But let it be a bran-new strain!

Mephistopheles.
No fear of that! We've just come back from Spain,
The lovely land of wine and song and lyre.
[Sings.]
There was a king, right stately,
Who had a great, big flea,--

Frosch.
Hear him! A flea! D'ye take there, boys? A flea!
I call that genteel company.

Mephistopheles [resumes].
There was a king, right stately,
Who had a great, big flea,
And loved him very greatly,
As if his own son were he.
He called the knight of stitches;
The tailor came straightway:
Ho! measure the youngster for breeches,
And make him a coat to-day!

Brander.
But don't forget to charge the knight of stitches,
The measure carefully to take,
And, as he loves his precious neck,
To leave no wrinkles in the breeches.

Mephistopheles.
In silk and velvet splendid
The creature now was drest,
To his coat were ribbons appended,
A cross was on his breast.
He had a great star on his collar,
Was a minister, in short;
And his relatives, greater and smaller,
Became great people at court.

The lords and ladies of honor
Fared worse than if they were hung,
The queen, she got them upon her,
And all were bitten and stung,
And did not dare to attack them,
Nor scratch, but let them stick.
We choke them and we crack them
The moment we feel one prick.

Chorus [loud].
We choke 'em and we crack 'em
The moment we feel one prick.

Frosch.
Bravo! Bravo! That was fine!

Siebel.
So shall each flea his life resign!

Brander.
Point your fingers and nip them fine!

Altmayer.
Hurra for Liberty! Hurra for Wine!

Mephistopheles.
I'd pledge the goddess, too, to show how high I set her,
Right gladly, if your wines were just a trifle better.

Siebel.
Don't say that thing again, you fretter!

Mephistopheles.
Did I not fear the landlord to affront;
I'd show these worthy guests this minute
What kind of stuff our stock has in it.

Siebel.
Just bring it on! I'll bear the brunt.

Frosch.
Give us a brimming glass, our praise shall then be ample,
But don't dole out too small a sample;
For if I'm to judge and criticize,
I need a good mouthful to make me wise.

Altmayer [softly].
They're from the Rhine, as near as I can make it.

Mephistopheles.
Bring us a gimlet here!

Brander.
What shall be done with that?
You've not the casks before the door, I take it?

Altmayer.
The landlord's tool-chest there is easily got at.

Mephistopheles [takes the gimlet] (to Frosch).
What will you have? It costs but speaking.

Frosch.
How do you mean? Have you so many kinds?

Mephistopheles.
Enough to suit all sorts of minds.

Altmayer.
Aha! old sot, your lips already licking!

Frosch.
Well, then! if I must choose, let Rhine-wine fill my beaker,
Our fatherland supplies the noblest liquor.

MEPHISTOPHELES
[boring a hole in the rim of the table near the place
where FROSCH sits].
Get us a little wax right off to make the stoppers!

Altmayer.
Ah, these are jugglers' tricks, and whappers!

Mephistopheles [to Brander].
And you?

Brander.
Champaigne's the wine for me,
But then right sparkling it must be!

[MEPHISTOPHELES bores; meanwhile one of them has made
the wax-stoppers and stopped the holes.]

Brander.
Hankerings for foreign things will sometimes haunt you,
The good so far one often finds;
Your real German man can't bear the French, I grant you,
And yet will gladly drink their wines.

Siebel [while Mephistopheles approaches his seat].
I don't like sour, it sets my mouth awry,
Let mine have real sweetness in it!

Mephistopheles [bores].
Well, you shall have Tokay this minute.

Altmayer.
No, sirs, just look me in the eye!
I see through this, 'tis what the chaps call smoking.

Mephistopheles.
Come now! That would be serious joking,
To make so free with worthy men.
But quickly now! Speak out again!
With what description can I serve you?

Altmayer.
Wait not to ask; with any, then.

[After all the holes are bored and stopped.]

Mephistopheles [with singular gestures].
From the vine-stock grapes we pluck;
Horns grow on the buck;
Wine is juicy, the wooden table,
Like wooden vines, to give wine is able.
An eye for nature's depths receive!
Here is a miracle, only believe!
Now draw the plugs and drink your fill!

ALL
[drawing the stoppers, and catching each in his glass
the wine he had desired].
Sweet spring, that yields us what we will!

Mephistopheles.
Only be careful not a drop to spill!
[They drink repeatedly.]

All [sing].
We're happy all as cannibals,
Five hundred hogs together.

Mephistopheles.
Look at them now, they're happy as can be!

Faust.
To go would suit my inclination.

Mephistopheles.
But first give heed, their bestiality
Will make a glorious demonstration.

SIEBEL
[drinks carelessly; the wine is spilt upon the ground
and turns to flame].
Help! fire! Ho! Help! The flames of hell!

Mephistopheles [conjuring the flame].
Peace, friendly element, be still!
[To the Toper.]
This time 'twas but a drop of fire from purgatory.

Siebel.
What does this mean? Wait there, or you'll be sorry!
It seems you do not know us well.

Frosch.
Not twice, in this way, will it do to joke us!

Altmayer.
I vote, we give him leave himself here scarce to make.

Siebel.
What, sir! How dare you undertake
To carry on here your old hocus-pocus?

Mephistopheles.
Be still, old wine-cask!

Siebel.
Broomstick, you!
Insult to injury add? Confound you!

Brander.
Stop there! Or blows shall rain down round you!

ALTMAYER
[draws a stopper out of the table; fire flies at him].
I burn! I burn!

Siebel.
Foul sorcery! Shame!
Lay on! the rascal is fair game!

[They draw their knives and rush at MEPHISTOPHELES.]

Mephistopheles [with a serious mien].
Word and shape of air!
Change place, new meaning wear!
Be here--and there!

[They stand astounded and look at each other.]

Altmayer.
Where am I? What a charming land!

Frosch.
Vine hills! My eyes! Is't true?

Siebel.
And grapes, too, close at hand!

Brander.
Beneath this green see what a stem is growing!
See what a bunch of grapes is glowing!
[He seizes SIEBEL by the nose. The rest do the same to each
other and raise their knives.]

Mephistopheles [as above].
Loose, Error, from their eyes the band!
How Satan plays his tricks, you need not now be told of.
[He vanishes with FAUST, the companions start back from each
other.]

Siebel.
What ails me?

Altmayer.
How?

Frosch.
Was that thy nose, friend, I had hold of?

Brander [to Siebel].
And I have thine, too, in my hand!

Altmayer.
O what a shock! through all my limbs 'tis crawling!
Get me a chair, be quick, I'm falling!

Frosch.
No, say what was the real case?

Siebel.
O show me where the churl is hiding!
Alive he shall not leave the place!

Altmayer.
Out through the cellar-door I saw him riding--
Upon a cask--he went full chase.--
Heavy as lead my feet are growing.

[Turning towards the table.]

My! If the wine should yet be flowing.

Siebel.
'Twas all deception and moonshine.

Frosch.
Yet I was sure I did drink wine.

Brander.
But how about the bunches, brother?

Altmayer.
After such miracles, I'll doubt no other!
[On a low hearth stands a great kettle over the fire. In the smoke,
which rises from it, are seen various forms. A female monkey sits by
the kettle and skims it, and takes care that it does not run over. The
male monkey with the young ones sits close by, warming himself. Walls and
ceiling are adorned 'with the most singular witch-household stuff.]

FAUST. MEPHISTOPHELES.

Faust.
Would that this vile witch-business were well over!
Dost promise me I shall recover
In this hodge-podge of craziness?
From an old hag do I advice require?
And will this filthy cooked-up mess
My youth by thirty years bring nigher?
Woe's me, if that's the best you know!
Already hope is from my bosom banished.
Has not a noble mind found long ago
Some balsam to restore a youth that's vanished?

Mephistopheles.
My friend, again thou speakest a wise thought!
I know a natural way to make thee young,--none apter!
But in another book it must be sought,
And is a quite peculiar chapter.

Faust.
I beg to know it.

Mephistopheles.
Well! here's one that needs no pay,
No help of physic, nor enchanting.
Out to the fields without delay,
And take to hacking, digging, planting;
Run the same round from day to day,
A treadmill-life, contented, leading,
With simple fare both mind and body feeding,
Live with the beast as beast, nor count it robbery
Shouldst thou manure, thyself, the field thou reapest;
Follow this course and, trust to me,
For eighty years thy youth thou keepest!

Faust.
I am not used to that, I ne'er could bring me to it,
To wield the spade, I could not do it.
The narrow life befits me not at all.

Mephistopheles.
So must we on the witch, then, call.

Faust.
But why just that old hag? Canst thou
Not brew thyself the needful liquor?

Mephistopheles.
That were a pretty pastime now
I'd build about a thousand bridges quicker.
Science and art alone won't do,
The work will call for patience, too;
Costs a still spirit years of occupation:
Time, only, strengthens the fine fermentation.
To tell each thing that forms a part
Would sound to thee like wildest fable!
The devil indeed has taught the art;
To make it not the devil is able.
[Espying the animals.]
See, what a genteel breed we here parade!
This is the house-boy! that's the maid!
[To the animals.]
Where's the old lady gone a mousing?

The animals.
Carousing;
Out she went
By the chimney-vent!

Mephistopheles.
How long does she spend in gadding and storming?

The animals.
While we are giving our paws a warming.

Mephistopheles [to Faust].
How do you find the dainty creatures?

Faust.
Disgusting as I ever chanced to see!

Mephistopheles.
No! a discourse like this to me,
I own, is one of life's most pleasant features;
[To the animals.]
Say, cursed dolls, that sweat, there, toiling!
What are you twirling with the spoon?

Animals.
A common beggar-soup we're boiling.

Mephistopheles.
You'll have a run of custom soon.

THE HE-MONKEY
[Comes along and fawns on MEPHISTOPHELES].
O fling up the dice,
Make me rich in a trice,
Turn fortune's wheel over!
My lot is right bad,
If money I had,
My wits would recover.

Mephistopheles.
The monkey'd be as merry as a cricket,
Would somebody give him a lottery-ticket!

[Meanwhile the young monkeys have been playing with a great
ball, which they roll backward and forward.]

The monkey.
'The world's the ball;
See't rise and fall,
Its roll you follow;
Like glass it rings:
Both, brittle things!
Within 'tis hollow.
There it shines clear,
And brighter here,--
I live--by 'Pollo!--
Dear son, I pray,
Keep hands away!
Thou shalt fall so!
'Tis made of clay,
Pots are, also.

Mephistopheles.
What means the sieve?

The monkey [takes it down].
Wert thou a thief,
'Twould show the thief and shame him.
[Runs to his mate and makes her look through.]
Look through the sieve!
Discern'st thou the thief,
And darest not name him?

Mephistopheles [approaching the fire].
And what's this pot?

The monkeys.
The dunce! I'll be shot!
He knows not the pot,
He knows not the kettle!

Mephistopheles.
Impertinence! Hush!

The monkey.
Here, take you the brush,
And sit on the settle!
[He forces MEPHISTOPHELES to sit down.]

FAUST
[who all this time has been standing before a looking-glass,
now approaching and now receding from it].

What do I see? What heavenly face
Doth, in this magic glass, enchant me!
O love, in mercy, now, thy swiftest pinions grant me!
And bear me to her field of space!
Ah, if I seek to approach what doth so haunt me,
If from this spot I dare to stir,
Dimly as through a mist I gaze on her!--
The loveliest vision of a woman!
Such lovely woman can there be?
Must I in these reposing limbs naught human.
But of all heavens the finest essence see?
Was such a thing on earth seen ever?

Mephistopheles.
Why, when you see a God six days in hard work spend,
And then cry bravo at the end,
Of course you look for something clever.
Look now thy fill; I have for thee
Just such a jewel, and will lead thee to her;
And happy, whose good fortune it shall be,
To bear her home, a prospered wooer!

[FAUST keeps on looking into the mirror.
MEPHISTOPHELES
stretching himself out on the settle and playing with the brush,
continues speaking.]
Here sit I like a king upon his throne,
The sceptre in my hand,--I want the crown alone.

THE ANIMALS
[who up to this time have been going through all sorts of queer antics
with each other, bring MEPHISTOPHELES a crown with a loud cry].
O do be so good,--
With sweat and with blood,
To take it and lime it;
[They go about clumsily with the crown and break it into two pieces,
with which they jump round.]
'Tis done now! We're free!
We speak and we see,
We hear and we rhyme it;

Faust [facing the mirror].
Woe's me! I've almost lost my wits.

Mephistopheles [pointing to the animals].
My head, too, I confess, is very near to spinning.

The animals.
And then if it hits
And every thing fits,
We've thoughts for our winning.

Faust [as before].
Up to my heart the flame is flying!
Let us begone--there's danger near!

Mephistopheles [in the former position].
Well, this, at least, there's no denying,
That we have undissembled poets here.

[The kettle, which the she-monkey has hitherto left unmatched, begins to
run over; a great flame breaks out, which roars up the chimney. The WITCH
comes riding down through the flame with a terrible outcry.]

Witch.
Ow! Ow! Ow! Ow!
The damned beast! The cursed sow!
Neglected the kettle, scorched the Frau!
The cursed crew!
[Seeing FAUST and MEPHISTOPHELES.]
And who are you?
And what d'ye do?
And what d'ye want?
And who sneaked in?
The fire-plague grim
Shall light on him
In every limb!

[She makes a dive at the kettle with the skimmer and spatters flames
at FAUST, MEPHISTOPHELES, and the creatures. These last whimper.]

MEPHISTOPHELES
[inverting the brush which he holds in his hand, and striking
among the glasses and pots].

In two! In two!
There lies the brew!
There lies the glass!
This joke must pass;
For time-beat, ass!
To thy melody, 'twill do.
[While the WITCH starts back full of wrath and horror.]
Skeleton! Scarcecrow! Spectre! Know'st thou me,
Thy lord and master? What prevents my dashing
Right in among thy cursed company,
Thyself and all thy monkey spirits smashing?
Has the red waistcoat thy respect no more?
Has the cock's-feather, too, escaped attention?
Hast never seen this face before?
My name, perchance, wouldst have me mention?

The witch.
Pardon the rudeness, sir, in me!
But sure no cloven foot I see.
Nor find I your two ravens either.

Mephistopheles.
I'll let thee off for this once so;
For a long while has passed, full well I know,
Since the last time we met together.
The culture, too, which licks the world to shape,
The devil himself cannot escape;
The phantom of the North men's thoughts have left behind them,
Horns, tail, and claws, where now d'ye find them?
And for the foot, with which dispense I nowise can,
'Twould with good circles hurt my standing;
And so I've worn, some years, like many a fine young man,
False calves to make me more commanding.

The witch [dancing].
O I shall lose my wits, I fear,
Do I, again, see Squire Satan here!

Mephistopheles.
Woman, the name offends my ear!

The witch.
Why so? What has it done to you?

Mephistopheles.
It has long since to fable-books been banished;
But men are none the better for it; true,
The wicked one, but not the wicked ones, has vanished.
Herr Baron callst thou me, then all is right and good;
I am a cavalier, like others. Doubt me?
Doubt for a moment of my noble blood?
See here the family arms I bear about me!
[He makes an indecent gesture.]

The witch [laughs immoderately].
Ha! ha! full well I know you, sir!
You are the same old rogue you always were!

Mephistopheles [to Faust].
I pray you, carefully attend,
This is the way to deal with witches, friend.

The witch.
Now, gentles, what shall I produce?

Mephistopheles.
A right good glassful of the well-known juice!
And pray you, let it be the oldest;
Age makes it doubly strong for use.

The witch.
Right gladly! Here I have a bottle,
From which, at times, I wet my throttle;
Which now, not in the slightest, stinks;
A glass to you I don't mind giving;
[Softly.]
But if this man, without preparing, drinks,
He has not, well you know, another hour for living.

Mephistopheles.

'Tis a good friend of mine, whom it shall straight cheer up;
Thy kitchen's best to give him don't delay thee.
Thy ring--thy spell, now, quick, I pray thee,
And give him then a good full cup.

[The WITCH, with strange gestures, draws a circle, and places singular
things in it; mean-while the glasses begin to ring, the kettle to sound
and make music. Finally, she brings a great book and places the monkeys in
the circle, whom she uses as a reading-desk and to hold the torches. She
beckons FAUST to come to her.]

Faust [to Mephistopheles].
Hold! what will come of this? These creatures,
These frantic gestures and distorted features,
And all the crazy, juggling fluff,
I've known and loathed it long enough!

Mephistopheles.
Pugh! that is only done to smoke us;
Don't be so serious, my man!
She must, as Doctor, play her hocus-pocus
To make the dose work better, that's the plan.
[He constrains FAUST to step into the circle.]

THE WITCH
[beginning with great emphasis to declaim out of the book]

Remember then!
Of One make Ten,
The Two let be,
Make even Three,
There's wealth for thee.
The Four pass o'er!
Of Five and Six,
(The witch so speaks,)
Make Seven and Eight,
The thing is straight:
And Nine is One
And Ten is none--
This is the witch's one-time-one!

Faust.
The old hag talks like one delirious.

Mephistopheles.
There's much more still, no less mysterious,
I know it well, the whole book sounds just so!
I've lost full many a year in poring o'er it,
For perfect contradiction, you must know,
A mystery stands, and fools and wise men bow before it,
The art is old and new, my son.
Men, in all times, by craft and terror,
With One and Three, and Three and One,
For truth have propagated error.
They've gone on gabbling so a thousand years;
Who on the fools would waste a minute?
Man generally thinks, if words he only hears,
Articulated noise must have some meaning in it.

The witch [goes on].
Deep wisdom's power
Has, to this hour,
From all the world been hidden!
Whoso thinks not,
To him 'tis brought,
To him it comes unbidden.

Faust.
What nonsense is she talking here?
My heart is on the point of cracking.
In one great choir I seem to hear
A hundred thousand ninnies clacking.

Mephistopheles.
Enough, enough, rare Sibyl, sing us
These runes no more, thy beverage bring us,
And quickly fill the goblet to the brim;
This drink may by my friend be safely taken:
Full many grades the man can reckon,
Many good swigs have entered him.

[The WITCH, with many ceremonies, pours the drink into a cup;
as she puts it to FAUST'S lips, there rises a light flame.]

Mephistopheles.
Down with it! Gulp it down! 'Twill prove
All that thy heart's wild wants desire.
Thou, with the devil, hand and glove,
And yet wilt be afraid of fire?

[The WITCH breaks the circle; FAUST steps out.]

Mephistopheles.
Now briskly forth! No rest for thee!

The witch.
Much comfort may the drink afford you!

Mephistopheles [to the witch].
And any favor you may ask of me,
I'll gladly on Walpurgis' night accord you.

The witch.
Here is a song, which if you sometimes sing,
'Twill stir up in your heart a special fire.

Mephistopheles [to Faust].
Only make haste; and even shouldst thou tire,
Still follow me; one must perspire,
That it may set his nerves all quivering.
I'll teach thee by and bye to prize a noble leisure,
And soon, too, shalt thou feel with hearty pleasure,
How busy Cupid stirs, and shakes his nimble wing.

Faust.
But first one look in yonder glass, I pray thee!
Such beauty I no more may find!

Mephistopheles.
Nay! in the flesh thine eyes shall soon display thee
The model of all woman-kind.
[Softly.]
Soon will, when once this drink shall heat thee,
In every girl a Helen meet thee!
FAUST. MARGARET [passing over].

Faust.
My fair young lady, will it offend her
If I offer my arm and escort to lend her?

Margaret.
Am neither lady, nor yet am fair!
Can find my way home without any one's care.
[Disengages herself and exit.]

Faust.
By heavens, but then the child is fair!
I've never seen the like, I swear.
So modest is she and so pure,
And somewhat saucy, too, to be sure.
The light of the cheek, the lip's red bloom,
I shall never forget to the day of doom!
How me cast down her lovely eyes,
Deep in my soul imprinted lies;
How she spoke up, so curt and tart,
Ah, that went right to my ravished heart!
[Enter MEPHISTOPHELES.]

Faust.
Hark, thou shalt find me a way to address her!

Mephistopheles.
Which one?

Faust.
She just went by.

Mephistopheles.
What! She?
She came just now from her father confessor,
Who from all sins pronounced her free;
I stole behind her noiselessly,
'Tis an innocent thing, who, for nothing at all,
Must go to the confessional;
O'er such as she no power I hold!

Faust.
But then she's over fourteen years old.

Mephistopheles.
Thou speak'st exactly like Jack Rake,
Who every fair flower his own would make.
And thinks there can be no favor nor fame,
But one may straightway pluck the same.
But 'twill not always do, we see.

Faust.
My worthy Master Gravity,
Let not a word of the Law be spoken!
One thing be clearly understood,--
Unless I clasp the sweet, young blood
This night in my arms--then, well and good:
When midnight strikes, our bond is broken.

Mephistopheles.
Reflect on all that lies in the way!
I need a fortnight, at least, to a day,
For finding so much as a way to reach her.

Faust.
Had I seven hours, to call my own,
Without the devil's aid, alone
I'd snare with ease so young a creature.

Mephistopheles.
You talk quite Frenchman-like to-day;
But don't be vexed beyond all measure.
What boots it thus to snatch at pleasure?
'Tis not so great, by a long way,
As if you first, with tender twaddle,
And every sort of fiddle-faddle,
Your little doll should mould and knead,
As one in French romances may read.

Faust.
My appetite needs no such spur.

Mephistopheles.
Now, then, without a jest or slur,
I tell you, once for all, such speed
With the fair creature won't succeed.
Nothing will here by storm be taken;
We must perforce on intrigue reckon.

Faust.
Get me some trinket the angel has blest!
Lead me to her chamber of rest!
Get me a 'kerchief from her neck,
A garter get me for love's sweet sake!

Mephistopheles.
To prove to you my willingness
To aid and serve you in this distress;
You shall visit her chamber, by me attended,
Before the passing day is ended.

Faust.
And see her, too? and have her?

Mephistopheles.
Nay!
She will to a neighbor's have gone away.
Meanwhile alone by yourself you may,
There in her atmosphere, feast at leisure
And revel in dreams of future pleasure.

Faust.
Shall we start at once?

Mephistopheles.
'Tis too early yet.

Faust.
Some present to take her for me you must get.

[Exit.]

Mephistopheles.
Presents already! Brave! He's on the right foundation!
Full many a noble place I know,
And treasure buried long ago;
Must make a bit of exploration.
FAUST [going up and down in thought.] MEPHISTOPHELES to him.

Mephistopheles.
By all that ever was jilted! By all the infernal fires!
I wish I knew something worse, to curse as my heart desires!

Faust.
What griping pain has hold of thee?
Such grins ne'er saw I in the worst stage-ranter!

Mephistopheles.
Oh, to the devil I'd give myself instanter,
If I were not already he!

Faust.
Some pin's loose in your head, old fellow!
That fits you, like a madman thus to bellow!

Mephistopheles.
Just think, the pretty toy we got for Peg,
A priest has hooked, the cursed plague I--
The thing came under the eye of the mother,
And caused her a dreadful internal pother:
The woman's scent is fine and strong;
Snuffles over her prayer-book all day long,
And knows, by the smell of an article, plain,
Whether the thing is holy or profane;
And as to the box she was soon aware
There could not be much blessing there.
"My child," she cried, "unrighteous gains
Ensnare the soul, dry up the veins.
We'll consecrate it to God's mother,
She'll give us some heavenly manna or other!"
Little Margaret made a wry face; "I see
'Tis, after all, a gift horse," said she;
"And sure, no godless one is he
Who brought it here so handsomely."
The mother sent for a priest (they're cunning);
Who scarce had found what game was running,
When he rolled his greedy eyes like a lizard,
And, "all is rightly disposed," said he,
"Who conquers wins, for a certainty.
The church has of old a famous gizzard,
She calls it little whole lands to devour,
Yet never a surfeit got to this hour;
The church alone, dear ladies; sans question,
Can give unrighteous gains digestion."

Faust.
That is a general pratice, too,
Common alike with king and Jew.

Mephistopheles.
Then pocketed bracelets and chains and rings
As if they were mushrooms or some such things,
With no more thanks, (the greedy-guts!)
Than if it had been a basket of nuts,
Promised them all sorts of heavenly pay--
And greatly edified were they.

Faust.
And Margery?

Mephistopheles.
Sits there in distress,
And what to do she cannot guess,
The jewels her daily and nightly thought,
And he still more by whom they were brought.

Faust. My heart is troubled for my pet.
Get her at once another set!
The first were no great things in their way.

Mephistopheles. O yes, my gentleman finds all child's play!

Faust. And what I wish, that mind and do!
Stick closely to her neighbor, too.
Don't be a devil soft as pap,
And fetch me some new jewels, old chap!

Mephistopheles. Yes, gracious Sir, I will with pleasure.
[Exit FAUST.]
Such love-sick fools will puff away
Sun, moon, and stars, and all in the azure,
To please a maiden's whimsies, any day.
[Exit.]
FAUST. MEPHISTOPHELES.

Faust.
How now? What progress? Will 't come right?

Mephistopheles.
Ha, bravo? So you're all on fire?
Full soon you'll see whom you desire.
In neighbor Martha's grounds we are to meet tonight.
That woman's one of nature's picking
For pandering and gipsy-tricking!

Faust.
So far, so good!

Mephistopheles.
But one thing we must do.

Faust.
Well, one good turn deserves another, true.

Mephistopheles.
We simply make a solemn deposition
That her lord's bones are laid in good condition
In holy ground at Padua, hid from view.

Faust.
That's wise! But then we first must make the journey thither?

Mephistopheles. Sancta simplicitas! no need of such to-do;
Just swear, and ask not why or whether.

Faust.
If that's the best you have, the plan's not worth a feather.

Mephistopheles.
O holy man! now that's just you!
In all thy life hast never, to this hour,
To give false witness taken pains?
Have you of God, the world, and all that it contains,
Of man, and all that stirs within his heart and brains,
Not given definitions with great power,
Unscrupulous breast, unblushing brow?
And if you search the matter clearly,
Knew you as much thereof, to speak sincerely,
As of Herr Schwerdtlein's death? Confess it now!

Faust.
Thou always wast a sophist and a liar.

Mephistopheles.
Ay, if one did not look a little nigher.
For will you not, in honor, to-morrow
Befool poor Margery to her sorrow,
And all the oaths of true love borrow?

Faust.
And from the heart, too.

Mephistopheles.
Well and fair!
Then there'll be talk of truth unending,
Of love o'ermastering, all transcending--
Will every word be heart-born there?

Faust.
Enough! It will!--If, for the passion
That fills and thrills my being's frame,
I find no name, no fit expression,
Then, through the world, with all my senses, ranging,
Seek what most strongly speaks the unchanging.
And call this glow, within me burning,
Infinite--endless--endless yearning,
Is that a devilish lying game?

Mephistopheles.
I'm right, nathless!

Faust.
Now, hark to me--
This once, I pray, and spare my lungs, old fellow--
Whoever will be right, and has a tongue to bellow,
Is sure to be.
But come, enough of swaggering, let's be quit,
For thou art right, because I must submit.
FAUST. MEPHISTOPHELES.

Faust.
How now? What progress? Will 't come right?

Mephistopheles.
Ha, bravo? So you're all on fire?
Full soon you'll see whom you desire.
In neighbor Martha's grounds we are to meet tonight.
That woman's one of nature's picking
For pandering and gipsy-tricking!

Faust.
So far, so good!

Mephistopheles.
But one thing we must do.

Faust.
Well, one good turn deserves another, true.

Mephistopheles.
We simply make a solemn deposition
That her lord's bones are laid in good condition
In holy ground at Padua, hid from view.

Faust.
That's wise! But then we first must make the journey thither?

Mephistopheles. Sancta simplicitas! no need of such to-do;
Just swear, and ask not why or whether.

Faust.
If that's the best you have, the plan's not worth a feather.

Mephistopheles.
O holy man! now that's just you!
In all thy life hast never, to this hour,
To give false witness taken pains?
Have you of God, the world, and all that it contains,
Of man, and all that stirs within his heart and brains,
Not given definitions with great power,
Unscrupulous breast, unblushing brow?
And if you search the matter clearly,
Knew you as much thereof, to speak sincerely,
As of Herr Schwerdtlein's death? Confess it now!

Faust.
Thou always wast a sophist and a liar.

Mephistopheles.
Ay, if one did not look a little nigher.
For will you not, in honor, to-morrow
Befool poor Margery to her sorrow,
And all the oaths of true love borrow?

Faust.
And from the heart, too.

Mephistopheles.
Well and fair!
Then there'll be talk of truth unending,
Of love o'ermastering, all transcending--
Will every word be heart-born there?

Faust.
Enough! It will!--If, for the passion
That fills and thrills my being's frame,
I find no name, no fit expression,
Then, through the world, with all my senses, ranging,
Seek what most strongly speaks the unchanging.
And call this glow, within me burning,
Infinite--endless--endless yearning,
Is that a devilish lying game?

Mephistopheles.
I'm right, nathless!

Faust.
Now, hark to me--
This once, I pray, and spare my lungs, old fellow--
Whoever will be right, and has a tongue to bellow,
Is sure to be.
But come, enough of swaggering, let's be quit,
For thou art right, because I must submit.
MARGARET on FAUST'S arm.
MARTHA with MEPHISTOPHELES.
[Promenading up and down.]

Margaret.
The gentleman but makes me more confused
With all his condescending goodness.
Men who have travelled wide are used
To bear with much from dread of rudeness;
I know too well, a man of so much mind
In my poor talk can little pleasure find.

Faust.
One look from thee, one word, delights me more
Than this world's wisdom o'er and o'er.
[Kisses her hand.]

Margaret.
Don't take that trouble, sir! How could you bear to kiss it?
A hand so ugly, coarse, and rough!
How much I've had to do! must I confess it--
Mother is more than close enough.
[They pass on.]

Martha.
And you, sir, are you always travelling so?

Mephistopheles.
Alas, that business forces us to do it!
With what regret from many a place we go,
Though tenderest bonds may bind us to it!

Martha.
'Twill do in youth's tumultuous maze
To wander round the world, a careless rover;
But soon will come the evil days,
And then, a lone dry stick, on the grave's brink to hover,
For that nobody ever prays.

Mephistopheles.
The distant prospect shakes my reason.

Martha.
Then, worthy sir, bethink yourself in season.
[They pass on.]

Margaret.
Yes, out of sight and out of mind!
Politeness you find no hard matter;
But you have friends in plenty, better
Than I, more sensible, more refined.

Faust.
Dear girl, what one calls sensible on earth,
Is often vanity and nonsense.

Margaret.
How?

Faust.
Ah, that the pure and simple never know
Aught of themselves and all their holy worth!
That meekness, lowliness, the highest measure
Of gifts by nature lavished, full and free--

Margaret.
One little moment, only, think of me,
I shall to think of you have ample time and leisure.

Faust.
You're, may be, much alone?

Margaret.
Our household is but small, I own,
And yet needs care, if truth were known.
We have no maid; so I attend to cooking, sweeping,
Knit, sew, do every thing, in fact;
And mother, in all branches of housekeeping,
Is so exact!
Not that she need be tied so very closely down;
We might stand higher than some others, rather;
A nice estate was left us by my father,
A house and garden not far out of town.
Yet, after all, my life runs pretty quiet;
My brother is a soldier,
My little sister's dead;
With the dear child indeed a wearing life I led;
And yet with all its plagues again would gladly try it,
The child was such a pet.

Faust.
An angel, if like thee!

Margaret.
I reared her and she heartily loved me.
She and my father never saw each other,
He died before her birth, and mother
Was given up, so low she lay,
But me, by slow degrees, recovered, day by day.
Of course she now, long time so feeble,
To nurse the poor little worm was unable,
And so I reared it all alone,
With milk and water; 'twas my own.
Upon my bosom all day long
It smiled and sprawled and so grew strong.

Faust.
Ah! thou hast truly known joy's fairest flower.

Margaret.
But no less truly many a heavy hour.
The wee thing's cradle stood at night
Close to my bed; did the least thing awake her,
My sleep took flight;
'Twas now to nurse her, now in bed to take her,
Then, if she was not still, to rise,
Walk up and down the room, and dance away her cries,
And at the wash-tub stand, when morning streaked the skies;
Then came the marketing and kitchen-tending,
Day in, day out, work never-ending.
One cannot always, sir, good temper keep;
But then it sweetens food and sweetens sleep.
[They pass on.]

Martha.
But the poor women suffer, you must own:
A bachelor is hard of reformation.

Mephistopheles.
Madam, it rests with such as you, alone,
To help me mend my situation.

Martha.
Speak plainly, sir, has none your fancy taken?
Has none made out a tender flame to waken?

Mephistopheles.
The proverb says: A man's own hearth,
And a brave wife, all gold and pearls are worth.

Martha.
I mean, has ne'er your heart been smitten slightly?

Mephistopheles.
I have, on every hand, been entertained politely.

Martha.
Have you not felt, I mean, a serious intention?

Mephistopheles.

Jesting with women, that's a thing one ne'er should mention.

Martha.
Ah, you misunderstand!

Mephistopheles.
It grieves me that I should!
But this I understand--that you are good.
[They pass on.]

Faust.
So then, my little angel recognized me,
As I came through the garden gate?

Margaret.
Did not my downcast eyes show you surprised me?

Faust.
And thou forgav'st that liberty, of late?
That impudence of mine, so daring,
As thou wast home from church repairing?

Margaret.
I was confused, the like was new to me;
No one could say a word to my dishonor.
Ah, thought I, has he, haply, in thy manner
Seen any boldness--impropriety?
It seemed as if the feeling seized him,
That he might treat this girl just as it pleased him.
Let me confess! I knew not from what cause,
Some flight relentings here began to threaten danger;
I know, right angry with myself I was,
That I could not be angrier with the stranger.

Faust.
Sweet darling!

Margaret.
Let me once!

[She plucks a china-aster and picks off the leaves one after another.]

Faust.
What's that for? A bouquet?

Margaret.
No, just for sport.

Faust.
How?

Margaret.
Go! you'll laugh at me; away!
[She picks and murmurs to herself.]

Faust.
What murmurest thou?

Margaret [half aloud].
He loves me--loves me not.

Faust.
Sweet face! from heaven that look was caught!

Margaret [goes on].
Loves me--not--loves me--not--
[picking off the last leaf with tender joy]
He loves me!

Faust.
Yes, my child! And be this floral word
An oracle to thee. He loves thee!
Knowest thou all it mean? He loves thee!
[Clasping both her hands.]

Margaret.
What thrill is this!

Faust.
O, shudder not! This look of mine.
This pressure of the hand shall tell thee
What cannot be expressed:
Give thyself up at once and feel a rapture,
An ecstasy never to end!
Never!--It's end were nothing but blank despair.
No, unending! unending!

[MARGARET presses his hands, extricates herself, and runs away.
He stands a moment in thought, then follows her].

Martha [coming].
The night falls fast.

Mephistopheles.
Ay, and we must away.

Martha.
If it were not for one vexation,
I would insist upon your longer stay.
Nobody seems to have no occupation,
No care nor labor,
Except to play the spy upon his neighbor;
And one becomes town-talk, do whatsoe'er they may.
But where's our pair of doves?

Mephistopheles.
Flown up the alley yonder.
Light summer-birds!

Martha.
He seems attached to her.

Mephistopheles.
No wonder.
And she to him. So goes the world, they say.
MARGARET [darts in, hides behind the door, presses the tip of
her finger to her lips, and peeps through the crack].

Margaret.
He comes!

Enter FAUST.

Faust.
Ah rogue, how sly thou art!
I've caught thee!
[Kisses her.]

Margaret [embracing him and returning the kiss].
Dear good man! I love thee from my heart!

[MEPHISTOPHELES knocks.]

Faust [stamping].
Who's there?

Mephistopheles.
A friend!

Faust.
A beast!

Mephistopheles.
Time flies, I don't offend you?

Martha [entering].
Yes, sir, 'tis growing late.

Faust.
May I not now attend you?

Margaret.
Mother would--Fare thee well!

Faust.
And must I leave thee then? Farewell!

Martha.
Ad!

Margaret.
Till, soon, we meet again!

[Exeunt FAUST and MEPHISTOPHELES.]

Margaret.
Good heavens! what such a man's one brain
Can in itself alone contain!
I blush my rudeness to confess,
And answer all he says with yes.
Am a poor, ignorant child, don't see
What he can possibly find in me.

[Exit.]
Faust [alone].
Spirit sublime, thou gav'st me, gav'st me all
For which I prayed. Thou didst not lift in vain
Thy face upon me in a flame of fire.
Gav'st me majestic nature for a realm,
The power to feel, enjoy her. Not alone
A freezing, formal visit didst thou grant;
Deep down into her breast invitedst me
To look, as if she were a bosom-friend.
The series of animated things
Thou bidst pass by me, teaching me to know
My brothers in the waters, woods, and air.
And when the storm-swept forest creaks and groans,
The giant pine-tree crashes, rending off
The neighboring boughs and limbs, and with deep roar
The thundering mountain echoes to its fall,
To a safe cavern then thou leadest me,
Showst me myself; and my own bosom's deep
Mysterious wonders open on my view.
And when before my sight the moon comes up
With soft effulgence; from the walls of rock,
From the damp thicket, slowly float around
The silvery shadows of a world gone by,
And temper meditation's sterner joy.
O! nothing perfect is vouchsafed to man:
I feel it now! Attendant on this bliss,
Which brings me ever nearer to the Gods,
Thou gav'st me the companion, whom I now
No more can spare, though cold and insolent;
He makes me hate, despise myself, and turns
Thy gifts to nothing with a word--a breath.
He kindles up a wild-fire in my breast,
Of restless longing for that lovely form.
Thus from desire I hurry to enjoyment,
And in enjoyment languish for desire.

Enter MEPHISTOPHELES.

Mephistopheles.
Will not this life have tired you by and bye?
I wonder it so long delights you?
'Tis well enough for once the thing to try;
Then off to where a new invites you!

Faust.
Would thou hadst something else to do,
That thus to spoil my joy thou burnest.

Mephistopheles.
Well! well! I'll leave thee, gladly too!--
Thou dar'st not tell me that in earnest!
'Twere no great loss, a fellow such as you,
So crazy, snappish, and uncivil.
One has, all day, his hands full, and more too;
To worm out from him what he'd have one do,
Or not do, puzzles e'en the very devil.

Faust.
Now, that I like! That's just the tone!
Wants thanks for boring me till I'm half dead!

Mephistopheles.
Poor son of earth, if left alone,
What sort of life wouldst thou have led?
How oft, by methods all my own,
I've chased the cobweb fancies from thy head!
And but for me, to parts unknown
Thou from this earth hadst long since fled.
What dost thou here through cave and crevice groping?
Why like a hornd owl sit moping?
And why from dripping stone, damp moss, and rotten wood
Here, like a toad, suck in thy food?
Delicious pastime! Ah, I see,
Somewhat of Doctor sticks to thee.

Faust.
What new life-power it gives me, canst thou guess--
This conversation with the wilderness?
Ay, couldst thou dream how sweet the employment,
Thou wouldst be devil enough to grudge me my enjoyment.

Mephistopheles.
Ay, joy from super-earthly fountains!
By night and day to lie upon the mountains,
To clasp in ecstasy both earth and heaven,
Swelled to a deity by fancy's leaven,
Pierce, like a nervous thrill, earth's very marrow,
Feel the whole six days' work for thee too narrow,
To enjoy, I know not what, in blest elation,
Then with thy lavish love o'erflow the whole creation.
Below thy sight the mortal cast,
And to the glorious vision give at last--
[with a gesture]
I must not say what termination!

Faust.
Shame on thee!

Mephistopheles.
This displeases thee; well, surely,
Thou hast a right to say "for shame" demurely.
One must not mention that to chaste ears--never,
Which chaste hearts cannot do without, however.
And, in one word, I grudge you not the pleasure
Of lying to yourself in moderate measure;
But 'twill not hold out long, I know;
Already thou art fast recoiling,
And soon, at this rate, wilt be boiling
With madness or despair and woe.
Enough of this! Thy sweetheart sits there lonely,
And all to her is close and drear.
Her thoughts are on thy image only,
She holds thee, past all utterance, dear.
At first thy passion came bounding and rushing
Like a brooklet o'erflowing with melted snow and rain;
Into her heart thou hast poured it gushing:
And now thy brooklet's dry again.
Methinks, thy woodland throne resigning,
'Twould better suit so great a lord
The poor young monkey to reward
For all the love with which she's pining.
She finds the time dismally long;
Stands at the window, sees the clouds on high
Over the old town-wall go by.
"Were I a little bird!" so runneth her song
All the day, half the night long.
At times she'll be laughing, seldom smile,
At times wept-out she'll seem,
Then again tranquil, you'd deem,--
Lovesick all the while.

Faust.
Viper! Viper!

Mephistopheles [aside].
Ay! and the prey grows riper!

Faust.
Reprobate! take thee far behind me!
No more that lovely woman name!
Bid not desire for her sweet person flame
Through each half-maddened sense, again to blind me!

Mephistopheles.
What then's to do? She fancies thou hast flown,
And more than half she's right, I own.

Faust.
I'm near her, and, though far away, my word,
I'd not forget her, lose her; never fear it!
I envy e'en the body of the Lord,
Oft as those precious lips of hers draw near it.

Mephistopheles.
No doubt; and oft my envious thought reposes
On the twin-pair that feed among the roses.

Faust.
Out, pimp!

Mephistopheles.
Well done! Your jeers I find fair game for laughter.
The God, who made both lad and lass,
Unwilling for a bungling hand to pass,
Made opportunity right after.
But come! fine cause for lamentation!
Her chamber is your destination,
And not the grave, I guess.

Faust.
What are the joys of heaven while her fond arms enfold me?
O let her kindling bosom hold me!
Feel I not always her distress?
The houseless am I not? the unbefriended?
The monster without aim or rest?
That, like a cataract, from rock to rock descended
To the abyss, with maddening greed possest:
She, on its brink, with childlike thoughts and lowly,--
Perched on the little Alpine field her cot,--
This narrow world, so still and holy
Ensphering, like a heaven, her lot.
And I, God's hatred daring,
Could not be content
The rocks all headlong bearing,
By me to ruins rent,--
Her, yea her peace, must I o'erwhelm and bury!
This victim, hell, to thee was necessary!
Help me, thou fiend, the pang soon ending!
What must be, let it quickly be!
And let her fate upon my head descending,
Crush, at one blow, both her and me.

Mephistopheles.
Ha! how it seethes again and glows!
Go in and comfort her, thou dunce!
Where such a dolt no outlet sees or knows,
He thinks he's reached the end at once.
None but the brave deserve the fair!
Thou hast had devil enough to make a decent show of.
For all the world a devil in despair
Is just the insipidest thing I know of.
MARGERY [at the spinning-wheel alone].
My heart is heavy,
My peace is o'er;
I never--ah! never--
Shall find it more.
While him I crave,
Each place is the grave,
The world is all
Turned into gall.
My wretched brain
Has lost its wits,
My wretched sense
Is all in bits.
My heart is heavy,
My peace is o'er;
I never--ah! never--
Shall find it more.
Him only to greet, I
The street look down,
Him only to meet, I
Roam through town.
His lofty step,
His noble height,
His smile of sweetness,
His eye of might,
His words of magic,
Breathing bliss,
His hand's warm pressure
And ah! his kiss.
My heart is heavy,
My peace is o'er,
I never--ah! never--
Shall find it more.
My bosom yearns
To behold him again.
Ah, could I find him
That best of men!
I'd tell him then
How I did miss him,
And kiss him
As much as I could,
Die on his kisses
I surely should!
MARGARET. FAUST.

Margaret.
Promise me, Henry.

Faust.
What I can.

Margaret.
How is it now with thy religion, say?
I know thou art a dear good man,
But fear thy thoughts do not run much that way.

Faust.
Leave that, my child! Enough, thou hast my heart;
For those I love with life I'd freely part;
I would not harm a soul, nor of its faith bereave it.

Margaret.
That's wrong, there's one true faith--one must believe it?

Faust.
Must one?

Margaret.
Ah, could I influence thee, dearest!
The holy sacraments thou scarce reverest.

Faust.
I honor them.

Margaret.
But yet without desire.
Of mass and confession both thou'st long begun to tire.
Believest thou in God?

Faust.
My. darling, who engages
To say, I do believe in God?
The question put to priests or sages:
Their answer seems as if it sought
To mock the asker.

Margaret.
Then believ'st thou not?

Faust.
Sweet face, do not misunderstand my thought!
Who dares express him?
And who confess him,
Saying, I do believe?
A man's heart bearing,
What man has the daring
To say: I acknowledge him not?
The All-enfolder,
The All-upholder,
Enfolds, upholds He not
Thee, me, Himself?
Upsprings not Heaven's blue arch high o'er thee?
Underneath thee does not earth stand fast?
See'st thou not, nightly climbing,
Tenderly glancing eternal stars?
Am I not gazing eye to eye on thee?
Through brain and bosom
Throngs not all life to thee,
Weaving in everlasting mystery
Obscurely, clearly, on all sides of thee?
Fill with it, to its utmost stretch, thy breast,
And in the consciousness when thou art wholly blest,
Then call it what thou wilt,
Joy! Heart! Love! God!
I have no name to give it!
All comes at last to feeling;
Name is but sound and smoke,
Beclouding Heaven's warm glow.

Margaret.
That is all fine and good, I know;
And just as the priest has often spoke,
Only with somewhat different phrases.

Faust.
All hearts, too, in all places,
Wherever Heaven pours down the day's broad blessing,
Each in its way the truth is confessing;
And why not I in mine, too?

Margaret.
Well, all have a way that they incline to,
But still there is something wrong with thee;
Thou hast no Christianity.

Faust.
Dear child!

Margaret.
It long has troubled me
That thou shouldst keep such company.

Faust.
How so?

Margaret.
The man whom thou for crony hast,
Is one whom I with all my soul detest.
Nothing in all my life has ever
Stirred up in my heart such a deep disfavor
As the ugly face that man has got.

Faust.
Sweet plaything; fear him not!

Margaret.
His presence stirs my blood, I own.
I can love almost all men I've ever known;
But much as thy presence with pleasure thrills me,
That man with a secret horror fills me.
And then for a knave I've suspected him long!
God pardon me, if I do him wrong!

Faust.
To make up a world such odd sticks are needed.

Margaret.
Shouldn't like to live in the house where he did!
Whenever I see him coming in,
He always wears such a mocking grin.
Half cold, half grim;
One sees, that naught has interest for him;
'Tis writ on his brow and can't be mistaken,
No soul in him can love awaken.
I feel in thy arms so happy, so free,
I yield myself up so blissfully,
He comes, and all in me is closed and frozen now.

Faust.
Ah, thou mistrustful angel, thou!

Margaret.
This weighs on me so sore,
That when we meet, and he is by me,
I feel, as if I loved thee now no more.
Nor could I ever pray, if he were nigh me,
That eats the very heart in me;
Henry, it must be so with thee.

Faust.
'Tis an antipathy of thine!

Margaret.
Farewell!

Faust.
Ah, can I ne'er recline
One little hour upon thy bosom, pressing
My heart to thine and all my soul confessing?

Margaret.
Ah, if my chamber were alone,
This night the bolt should give thee free admission;
But mother wakes at every tone,
And if she had the least suspicion,
Heavens! I should die upon the spot!

Faust.
Thou angel, need of that there's not.
Here is a flask! Three drops alone
Mix with her drink, and nature
Into a deep and pleasant sleep is thrown.

Margaret.
Refuse thee, what can I, poor creature?
I hope, of course, it will not harm her!

Faust.
Would I advise it then, my charmer?

Margaret.
Best man, when thou dost look at me,
I know not what, moves me to do thy will;
I have already done so much for thee,
Scarce any thing seems left me to fulfil.
[Exit.]

Enter MEPHISTOPHELES.

Mephtftopheles.
The monkey! is she gone?

Faust.
Hast played the spy again?

Mephistopheles.
I overheard it all quite fully.
The Doctor has been well catechized then?
Hope it will sit well on him truly.
The maidens won't rest till they know if the men
Believe as good old custom bids them do.
They think: if there he yields, he'll follow our will too.

Faust.
Monster, thou wilt not, canst not see,
How this true soul that loves so dearly,
Yet hugs, at every cost,
The faith which she
Counts Heaven itself, is horror-struck sincerely
To think of giving up her dearest man for lost.

Mephistopheles.
Thou supersensual, sensual wooer,
A girl by the nose is leading thee.

Faust.
Abortion vile of fire and sewer!

Mephistopheles.
In physiognomy, too, her skill is masterly.
When I am near she feels she knows not how,
My little mask some secret meaning shows;
She thinks, I'm certainly a genius, now,
Perhaps the very devil--who knows?
To-night then?--

Faust.
Well, what's that to you?

Mephistopheles.
I find my pleasure in it, too!
MARGERY and LIZZY with Pitchers.

Lizzy.
Hast heard no news of Barbara to-day?

Margery.
No, not a word. I've not been out much lately.

Lizzy.
It came to me through Sybill very straightly.
She's made a fool of herself at last, they say.
That comes of taking airs!

Margery.
What meanst thou?

Lizzy.
Pah!
She daily eats and drinks for two now.

Margery.
Ah!

Lizzy.
It serves the jade right for being so callow.
How long she's been hanging upon the fellow!
Such a promenading!
To fair and dance parading!
Everywhere as first she must shine,
He was treating her always with tarts and wine;
She began to think herself something fine,
And let her vanity so degrade her
That she even accepted the presents he made her.
There was hugging and smacking, and so it went on--
And lo! and behold! the flower is gone!

Margery.
Poor thing!

Lizzy.
Canst any pity for her feel!
When such as we spun at the wheel,
Our mothers kept us in-doors after dark;
While she stood cozy with her spark,
Or sate on the door-bench, or sauntered round,
And never an hour too long they found.
But now her pride may let itself down,
To do penance at church in the sinner's gown!

Margery.
He'll certainly take her for his wife.

Lizzy.
He'd be a fool! A spruce young blade
Has room enough to ply his trade.
Besides, he's gone.

Margery.
Now, that's not fair!

Lizzy.
If she gets him, her lot'll be hard to bear.
The boys will tear up her wreath, and what's more,
We'll strew chopped straw before her door.

[Exit.]

Margery [going home].
Time was when I, too, instead of bewailing,
Could boldly jeer at a poor girl's failing!
When my scorn could scarcely find expression
At hearing of another's transgression!
How black it seemed! though black as could be,
It never was black enough for me.
I blessed my soul, and felt so high,
And now, myself, in sin I lie!
Yet--all that led me to it, sure,
O God! it was so dear, so pure!
[In a niche a devotional image of the Mater Dolorosa,
before it pots of flowers.]

MARGERY [puts fresh flowers into the pots].
Ah, hear me,
Draw kindly near me,
Mother of sorrows, heal my woe!

Sword-pierced, and stricken
With pangs that sicken,
Thou seest thy son's last life-blood flow!

Thy look--thy sighing---
To God are crying,
Charged with a son's and mother's woe!

Sad mother!
What other
Knows the pangs that eat me to the bone?
What within my poor heart burneth,
How it trembleth, how it yearneth,
Thou canst feel and thou alone!

Go where I will, I never
Find peace or hope--forever
Woe, woe and misery!

Alone, when all are sleeping,
I'm weeping, weeping, weeping,
My heart is crushed in me.

The pots before my window,
In the early morning-hours,
Alas, my tears bedewed them,
As I plucked for thee these flowers,

When the bright sun good morrow
In at my window said,
Already, in my anguish,
I sate there in my bed.

From shame and death redeem me, oh!
Draw near me,
And, pitying, hear me,
Mother of sorrows, heal my woe!
[In a niche a devotional image of the Mater Dolorosa,
before it pots of flowers.]

MARGERY [puts fresh flowers into the pots].
Ah, hear me,
Draw kindly near me,
Mother of sorrows, heal my woe!

Sword-pierced, and stricken
With pangs that sicken,
Thou seest thy son's last life-blood flow!

Thy look--thy sighing---
To God are crying,
Charged with a son's and mother's woe!

Sad mother!
What other
Knows the pangs that eat me to the bone?
What within my poor heart burneth,
How it trembleth, how it yearneth,
Thou canst feel and thou alone!

Go where I will, I never
Find peace or hope--forever
Woe, woe and misery!

Alone, when all are sleeping,
I'm weeping, weeping, weeping,
My heart is crushed in me.

The pots before my window,
In the early morning-hours,
Alas, my tears bedewed them,
As I plucked for thee these flowers,

When the bright sun good morrow
In at my window said,
Already, in my anguish,
I sate there in my bed.

From shame and death redeem me, oh!
Draw near me,
And, pitying, hear me,
Mother of sorrows, heal my woe!
Street before MARGERY'S Door.

VALENTINE [soldier, MARGERY'S brother].

When at the mess I used to sit,
Where many a one will show his wit,
And heard my comrades one and all
The flower of the sex extol,
Drowning their praise with bumpers high,
Leaning upon my elbows, I
Would hear the braggadocios through,
And then, when it came my turn, too,
Would stroke my beard and, smiling, say,
A brimming bumper in my hand:
All very decent in their way!
But is there one, in all the land,
With my sweet Margy to compare,
A candle to hold to my sister fair?
Bravo! Kling! Klang! it echoed round!
One party cried: 'tis truth he speaks,
She is the jewel of the sex!
And the braggarts all in silence were bound.
And now!--one could pull out his hair with vexation,
And run up the walls for mortification!--
Every two-legged creature that goes in breeches
Can mock me with sneers and stinging speeches!
And I like a guilty debtor sitting,
For fear of each casual word am sweating!
And though I could smash them in my ire,
I dare not call a soul of them liar.

What's that comes yonder, sneaking along?
There are two of them there, if I see not wrong.
Is't he, I'll give him a dose that'll cure him,
He'll not leave the spot alive, I assure him!

FAUST. MEPHISTOPHELES.

Faust.
How from yon window of the sacristy
The ever-burning lamp sends up its glimmer,
And round the edge grows ever dimmer,
Till in the gloom its flickerings die!
So in my bosom all is nightlike.

Mephistopheles.
A starving tom-cat I feel quite like,
That o'er the fire ladders crawls
Then softly creeps, ground the walls.
My aim's quite virtuous ne'ertheless,
A bit of thievish lust, a bit of wantonness.
I feel it all my members haunting--
The glorious Walpurgis night.
One day--then comes the feast enchanting
That shall all pinings well requite.

Faust.
Meanwhile can that the casket be, I wonder,
I see behind rise glittering yonder.

Mephistopheles.
Yes, and thou soon shalt have the pleasure
Of lifting out the precious treasure.
I lately 'neath the lid did squint,
Has piles of lion-dollars in't.

Faust.
But not a jewel? Not a ring?
To deck my mistress not a trinket?

Mephistopheles.
I caught a glimpse of some such thing,
Sort of pearl bracelet I should think it.

Faust.
That's well! I always like to bear
Some present when I visit my fair.

Mephistopheles.
You should not murmur if your fate is,
To have a bit of pleasure gratis.
Now, as the stars fill heaven with their bright throng,
List a fine piece, artistic purely:
I sing her here a moral song,
To make a fool of her more surely.
[Sings to the guitar.]
What dost thou here,
Katrina dear,
At daybreak drear,
Before thy lover's chamber?
Give o'er, give o'er!
The maid his door
Lets in, no more
Goes out a maid--remember!

Take heed! take heed!
Once done, the deed
Ye'll rue with speed--
And then--good night--poor thing--a!
Though ne'er so fair
His speech, beware,
Until you bear
His ring upon your finger.

Valentine [comes forward].
Whom lur'ft thou here? what prey dost scent?
Rat-catching offspring of perdition!
To hell goes first the instrument!
To hell then follows the musician!

Mephistopheles.
He 's broken the guitar! to music, then, good-bye, now.

Valentine.
A game of cracking skulls we'll try now!

Mephistopbeles [to Faust].
Never you flinch, Sir Doctor! Brisk!
Mind every word I say---be wary!
Stand close by me, out with your whisk!
Thrust home upon the churl! I'll parry.

Valentine.
Then parry that!

Mephistopheles.
Be sure. Why not?

Valentine.
And that!

Mephistopheles.
With ease!

Valentine.
The devil's aid he's got!
But what is this? My hand's already lame.

Mephistopheles [to Faust].
Thrust home!

Valentine [falls].
O woe!

Mephistopheles.
Now is the lubber tame!
But come! We must be off. I hear a clatter;
And cries of murder, too, that fast increase.
I'm an old hand to manage the police,
But then the penal court's another matter.

Martha.
Come out! Come out!

Margery [at the window].
Bring on a light!

Martha [as above].
They swear and scuffle, scream and fight.

People.
There's one, has got's death-blow!

Martha [coming out].
Where are the murderers, have they flown?

Margery [coming out].
Who's lying here?

People.
Thy mother's son.

Margery.
Almighty God! What woe!

Valentine.
I'm dying! that is quickly said,
And even quicklier done.
Women! Why howl, as if half-dead?
Come, hear me, every one!
[All gather round him.]
My Margery, look! Young art thou still,
But managest thy matters ill,
Hast not learned out yet quite.
I say in confidence--think it o'er:
Thou art just once for all a whore;
Why, be one, then, outright.

Margery.
My brother! God! What words to me!

Valentine.
In this game let our Lord God be!
That which is done, alas! is done.
And every thing its course will run.
With one you secretly begin,
Presently more of them come in,
And when a dozen share in thee,
Thou art the whole town's property.

When shame is born to this world of sorrow,
The birth is carefully hid from sight,
And the mysterious veil of night
To cover her head they borrow;
Yes, they would gladly stifle the wearer;
But as she grows and holds herself high,
She walks uncovered in day's broad eye,
Though she has not become a whit fairer.
The uglier her face to sight,
The more she courts the noonday light.

Already I the time can see
When all good souls shall shrink from thee,
Thou prostitute, when thou go'st by them,
As if a tainted corpse were nigh them.
Thy heart within thy breast shall quake then,
When they look thee in the face.
Shalt wear no gold chain more on thy neck then!
Shalt stand no more in the holy place!
No pleasure in point-lace collars take then,
Nor for the dance thy person deck then!
But into some dark corner gliding,
'Mong beggars and cripples wilt be hiding;
And even should God thy sin forgive,
Wilt be curs'd on earth while thou shalt live!

Martha.
Your soul to the mercy of God surrender!
Will you add to your load the sin of slander?

Valentine.
Service, Organ, and Singing.

[MARGERY amidst a crowd of people. EVIL SPIRIT behind MARGERY.]

Evil Spirit.
How different was it with thee, Margy,
When, innocent and artless,
Thou cam'st here to the altar,
From the well-thumbed little prayer-book,
Petitions lisping,
Half full of child's play,
Half full of Heaven!
Margy!
Where are thy thoughts?
What crime is buried
Deep within thy heart?
Prayest thou haply for thy mother, who
Slept over into long, long pain, on thy account?
Whose blood upon thy threshold lies?
--And stirs there not, already
Beneath thy heart a life
Tormenting itself and thee
With bodings of its coming hour?

Margery.
Woe! Woe!
Could I rid me of the thoughts,
Still through my brain backward and forward flitting,
Against my will!

Chorus.
Dies irae, dies illa
Solvet saeclum in favill.

[Organ plays.]

Evil Spirit.
Wrath smites thee!
Hark! the trumpet sounds!
The graves are trembling!
And thy heart,
Made o'er again
For fiery torments,
Waking from its ashes
Starts up!

Margery.
Would I were hence!
I feel as if the organ's peal
My breath were stifling,
The choral chant
My heart were melting.

Chorus.
Judex ergo cum sedebit,
Quidquid latet apparebit.
Nil inultum remanebit.

Margery.
How cramped it feels!
The walls and pillars
Imprison me!
And the arches
Crush me!--Air!

Evil Spirit.
What! hide thee! sin and shame
Will not be hidden!
Air? Light?
Woe's thee!

Chorus.
Quid sum miser tunc dicturus?
Quem patronum rogaturus?
Cum vix justus sit securus.

Evil Spirit.
They turn their faces,
The glorified, from thee.
To take thy hand, the pure ones
Shudder with horror.
Woe!

Chorus.
Quid sum miser tunc dicturus?

Margery.
Neighbor! your phial!--
[She swoons.]